Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 1 of 27 Übersetzung durch das Bundesministerium für Arbeit und Soziales  
Translation provided by the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs  
Stand: Die Übersetzung berücksich tigt die Änderung(en)  durch Art . 1 des Gesetzes vom 2 8. 
Juni 2023  (BGBl. 2023 I Nr. 1 72). 
Version information: The translation includes the amendment(s) to the Act by Article 1 of the 
Act of 2 8 June 2023  (Federal Law Gazette 2023 I No. 172 ). 
 
Zur Nutzung dieser Übersetzung lesen Sie bitte den Hinweis auf www.gesetze -im-internet.de 
unter "Translations" . 
 
For conditions governing use of this translation, please see the information provided at 
www.gesetze -im-internet.de under "Translations" . 
Act on Mandatory Working Conditions for Workers Posted 
Across Borders and for Workers Regularly Employed in 
Germany  
(Arbeitnehmer -Entsendegesetz – AEntG)  
Posted Workers Act of 20 April 2009 (Federal La w Gazette I, p.  799), as last amended by 
Article 1 of the Act of 28 June  2023 (Federal Law Gazette 2023 I No. 172 ) 
Division  1 
Purpose  
Section  1 
Purpose  
The objectives of this Act are to establish and enforce appropriate minimum working 
conditions for worke rs who are posted across borders and for workers who are regularly 
employed in Germany, as well as to guarantee fair and effective conditions of competition by 
extending the coverage of the provisions of sector -specific collective agreements. The aim is 
thus both to preserve jobs which are subject to social security contributions and to safeguard 
the role which collective bargaining autonomy plays in terms of conflict resolution and 
structuring relations between the social partners.  
Division  2 
General worki ng conditions  
Section  2 
General working conditions  
(1) The rules in statutory or administrative provisions relating to the following working 
conditions are also mandatorily applicable to employment relationships between employers 
established abroad and the ir workers employed in Germany:  
1. remuneration, including overtime rates, though not rules relating to occupational 
pension schemes,  
2. minimum paid annual leave,  
3. maximum work periods , minimum rest periods  and break periods , 
4. conditions for hiring ou t workers, in particular the supply of workers by 
temporary work agencies,  
5. health, safety and hygiene at work, including requirements made of 
accommodation provided directly or indirectly, for a fee or free of charge, by an employer 
to workers who are s ent from their regular place of employment,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 2 of 27 6. protective measures with regard to the conditions of employment of pregnant 
women and women who have recently given birth, of children and young people,  
7. gender equality and other provisions on non -discrimin ation, and  
8. allowances paid or the reimbursement of expenditure to cover travel, board and 
lodging for workers who are away from home for professional reasons.  
(2) An employer established abroad employs a worker in Germany even if that worker is 
temporar ily supplied to a user enterprise established abroad or in Germany and that user 
enterprise employs the worker in Germany.  
(3) Subsection  (1) no.  8 applies to employers established abroad if their workers  
1. have to travel to or from their regular place of  employment in Germany, or  
2. are temporarily sent by their employer from their regular place of employment in 
Germany to another place of employment.  
Section  2a 
Remuneration  
ʻRemunerationʼ within the meaning of section  2 (1) no.  1 encompasses all those constituent 
elements of remuneration , which workers receive from their employer in cash or in kind for 
work performed. More specifically, remuneration includes basic remuneratio n, including 
those constituent elements , which are linked to the type of task performed by workers, their 
qualifications and work experience, and the region, as well as allowances, bonuses and 
gratuities, including overtime rates. Remuneration also encompa sses rules governing its due 
date, including exceptions and conditions for their application.  
Section  2b 
Crediting of allowance for posting  
(1) If workers receive an allowance from an employer established abroad for the period in 
which they are performing work in Germany (allowance for posting), this may be credited 
against remuneration as defined in section  2 (1) no.  1. This does not apply to the extent that 
the allowance for posting is paid in reimbursement of costs , which are actually incurred on 
account  of the posting (costs of posting). Costs of posting in particular include expenditure to 
cover travel, board and lodging.  
(2) If the working conditions applicable to the employment relationship do not stipulate which 
constituent elements of an allowance f or posting are to be paid in reimbursement of the 
costs of posting or which constituent elements of an allowance for posting form part of 
remuneration, it is irrefutably assumed that the entire allowance for posting is paid in 
reimbursement of the costs of  posting.  
Division  3 
Working conditions based on collective agreements  
Section  3 
Working conditions based on collective agreements  
Under the conditions of sections  4 to 6, the provisions of a national collective agreement are 
also mandatorily applicable to  employment relationships between employers established 
abroad and their workers who are employed within the area of application of that collective 
agreement if  
1. the collective agreement has been declared universally applicable, or  
2. a statutory instrum ent has been issued in accordance with section  7 or section  
7a. 
Section  2 (2) applies accordingly. No national collective agreement is required where 
working conditions within the meaning of section  5 no.  2, no. 3 or no. 4 which, when taken Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 3 of 27 together, cover  the entire area of application of this Act form the subject matter of collectively 
agreed regulations.  
Section  4 
Sectors  
(1) Section  3 sentence  1 no.  2 applies to collective agreements applicable to  
1. the main or ancillary building industry within the me aning of the Ordinance 
Relating to Establishments Engaged in Building Work ( Baubetriebe -Verordnung ) of 28  
October  1980 (Federal Law Gazette I, p.  2033), as last amended by the Ordinance of 26  
April 2006 (Federal Law Gazette I, p.  1085), as amended, includi ng the provision of 
assembly services on building sites located outside of the place of business,  
2. facility cleaning services,  
3. postal services,  
4. security services,  
5. specialist mining work in hard coal mines,  
6. laundering services in the business -to-business sector,  
7. the waste industry, including road cleaning and winter road clearance services,  
8. education and training services pursuant to Book Two of the Social Code 
(Sozialgesetzbuch II ) or Book Three of the Social Code ( Sozialgesetzbuch III ), and 
9. slaughtering and meat processing.  
(2) Further, section  3 sentence  1 no.  2 applies to collective agreements applicable to all 
sectors other than those referred to in subsection  (1) if coverage of the provisions of the 
respective collective agreement  appears necessary in the public interest in order to achieve 
the objectives under section  1 and, in particular, to counter predatory competition in respect 
of wage costs . 
Section  5 
Working conditions  
A collective agreement as referred to in section  3 may set out  
1. minimum pay rates, which may differ depending on the type of task performed 
by workers and their qualifications and by region, including overtime rates, whereby the 
types of tasks and qualifications may be grouped into a total of up to three pay  grades,  
1a. constituent elements of remuneration as referred to in section  2 (1) no.  1 other 
than those included in no.  1 above,  
2. the amount of recreational leave, holiday pay or additional holiday pay,  
3. the collection of contributions and granting of  benefits in connection with holiday 
entitlements as set out in no.  2 by a joint facility of the parties to the collective agreement 
where it is guaranteed that the foreign employer is not simultaneously required to pay 
contributions towards that joint fac ility and towards a comparable facility in the state of the 
employer’s establishment and the procedure applied by the joint facility of the parties to 
the collective agreement involves crediting those benefits which the foreign employer has 
already extende d to workers in the fulfilment of their holiday entitlement as provided by 
statute, collective agreement or individual agreement,  
4. the requirements made of accommodation provided directly or indirectly, for a 
fee or free of charge, by an employer to work ers who are sent from their regular place of 
employment, and  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 4 of 27 5. working conditions within the meaning of section  2 no.  3 to no.  8. 
Working conditions under sentence  1 no.  1 to no.  3 also encompass rules governing the due 
date of the relevant entitlements, including any agreed exceptions thereto and the conditions 
for their application . 
Section  6 
Special provisions  
(1) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  1, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its indep endent departments predominantly 
provides building services in accordance with section  101 (2) of Book Three of the Social 
Code.  
(2) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  2, this Division 
applies where an establishment o r one of its independent departments predominantly 
provides facility cleaning services.  
(3) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  3, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its independent departments pred ominantly carries 
mail for third parties on a commercial basis or as a recurring pursuit.  
(4) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  4, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its independent departments pr edominantly 
provides services in the security guard and security sector or inspection and public order 
services which serve the protection of all types of legal interests, in particular life, health or 
property.  
(5) In the case of a collective agreement as  referred to in section  4 (1) no.  5, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its independent departments, on behalf of a third 
party, predominantly excavates pits in domestic hard coal mines or carries out other special 
underground mining wo rk. 
(6) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  6, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its independent departments predominantly 
launders textiles on a commercial basis for commercial clients as well as for public -sector or 
church facilities, regardless of whether that laundry is the property of the laundry facility or of 
the client. This Division does not apply to laund ering  services provided by workshops for 
persons with disabilities within the meaning of section  219 of Book Nine of the Social Code 
(Sozialgesetzbuch IX ). 
(7) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  7, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its independent departments predominantly 
collects , transports, stores, treats, disposes of or recycles waste within the meaning of 
section  3 (1) sentence  1 of the Circular Economy Act ( Kreislaufwirtschaftsgesetz ) or provides 
the services of sweeping and cleaning public thoroughfares and the clearing of p ublic 
thoroughfares of snow and ice, including by gritting and salting.  
(8) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  8, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its independent departments predominantly carrie s 
out education and training measures in accordance with Book Two or Book Three of the 
Social Code. Vocational rehabilitation facilities within the meaning of section  51 (1) sentence  
1 of Book Nine of the Social Code are exempted therefrom.  
(9) In the case  of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  9, this Division 
applies in establishments or one of their independent departments in which animals are 
predominantly slaughtered or meat is predominantly processed (establishments in the meat 
sector) and in establishments or one of their independent departments which predominantly 
deploy their workers in establishments in the meat sector. ʻSlaughteringʼ here refers to all the 
tasks involved in the slaughter ing and cutting of animals, except fish. ʻProcessingʼ here 
refers to all the tasks involved in the subsequent processing of meat products resulting from 
slaughtering to produce food, as w ell as portioning and packaging. It does not encompass 
that processing in which the treatment, portioning or packaging of meat products resulting 
from slaughtering is done on the direct request of the end consumer.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 5 of 27 (10) Where a collective agreement as refe rred to in subsections  (1) to (9) defines the term 
ʻestablishment ʼ or ʻindependent departmentʼ, that definition is definitive.  
Section  7 
Statutory instrument in cases under section  4 (1) 
(1) At the joint request of the parties to a collective agreement within the meaning of section  
4 (1) and sections  5 and  6, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs may determine, 
by way of a statutory instrument not requiring the approval of the Bundesrat, that the 
provisions of that collective agreement apply to all employers and workers included in its 
scope of application and not bound by it if this appears necessary in the public interest in 
order to achieve the legislative objectives under section  1. Sentence  1 does not apply to 
working conditions based on collective agreements under section  5 sentence  1 no.  1a. 
(2) Where several collective agreements applicable in a particular sector at least partially 
overlap in terms of the sector -specific activities to which they apply, the Federal Ministry of 
Labour and Social Affairs is required, when taking its decision in accordance with subsection  
(1) as part of its overall assessment, not only to take account of the legislative objectives 
under section  1 but also of the representativity of the respective collective agreements. 
When determining such representativity, co nsideration is primarily to be given to  
1. the number of workers covered by the scope of application of the collective 
agreement who are employed by the respective employers bound by the collective 
agreement,  
2. the number of members of the trade union whi ch concluded the collective 
agreement who are covered by the scope of application of the respective collective 
agreement.  
(3) Where applications have been made for several collective agreements to be declared 
universally applicable, the Federal Ministry of  Labour and Social Affairs is required to take 
especial care when weighing up those interests with constitutional status affected by the 
decision and to strike a careful balance between the competing basic rights.  
(4) Before issuing a statutory instrument,  the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs 
gives those employers and workers covered by the scope of application of that statutory 
instrument, the parties to the collective agreement and, in the cases referred to in subsection  
(2), the parties to o ther collective agreements, as well as commissions constituted on the 
basis of parity which lay down working conditions under canon law for the remit of church 
employers covered, at least in part, by the scope of application of the statutory instrument 
the opportunity to submit a written statement within three weeks, which period begins to run 
as from the day of publication of the draft of the statutory instrument.  
(5) If a request as referred to in subsection  (1) is submitted, for the first time, in one of  the 
sectors referred to in section  4 (1), then after the expiry of the time limit under subsection  (4), 
the Committee as referred to in section  5 (1) sentence  1 of the Collective Agreements Act 
(Tarifvertragsgesetz ) (Collective Agreements Committee) is in volved. If at least four of the 
members of the Committee vote for the application or the Committee does not submit a 
statement within a period of two months, a statutory instrument as referred to in subsection  
(1) may be issued. If two or three members of the Committee vote for the application, a 
statutory instrument can only be issued by the Federal Government. Sentences  1 to 3 do not 
apply to collective agreements as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  1 to no.  8. 
Section  7a 
Statutory instrument in cases und er section  4 (2) 
(1) At the joint request of the parties to a collective agreement within the meaning of section  
4 (2) and section  5, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs may determine, by way 
of a statutory instrument not requiring the approv al of the Bundesrat, that the provisions of 
that collective agreement apply to all employers and workers included in its scope of 
application and not bound by it if this appears necessary in the public interest in order to Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 6 of 27 achieve the legislative objective s under section  1 and, in particular, to counter predatory 
competition in respect of wage costs. Sentence  1 does not apply to collectively agreed 
working conditions under section  5 sentence  1 no.  1a. The Federal Ministry of Labour and 
Social Affairs issues  a statutory instrument applicable to the care sector (section  10) in 
consultation with the Federal Ministry of Health without the approval of the Bundesrat. In the 
case of a statutory instrument issued in accordance with sentence  3, the conditions set out  in 
subsection  (1a) are also to be met and consideration is also to be given to the legislative 
objectives under section  11 (2). 
(1a) Before concluding a collective agreement as referred to in subsection  (1) which is 
applicable to the care sector, the Fede ral Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs gives notice, 
upon joint notification by the parties to the collective agreement, that negotiations on such a 
collective agreement have begun. Religious communities within whose remit commissions 
constituted on the  basis of parity which determine working conditions under canon law for 
the remit of church employers in the care sector have been established may, within three 
weeks following such notice, designate to the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs a 
commission established for its remit which is to be heard by the parties to the collective 
agreement in respect of the anticipated content of that collective agreement. The hearing is 
oral if the relevant commission or the parties to the collective agreemen t so request. The 
request as referred to in subsection  (1) requires the written consent of at least two of the 
commissions appointed in accordance with sentence  2. These commissions need to have 
been established within the remits of religious communities w ithin which a total at least two 
thirds of all workers employed in the care sector within the remits of religious communities 
are employed. A commission’s consent remedies any defects in connection with its hearing.  
(2) Section  7 (2) and (3) applies accord ingly.  
(3) Before issuing the statutory instrument, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs 
gives those employers and workers covered by the scope of application of that statutory 
instrument and those employers and workers possibly affected by it , the parties to the 
collective agreement, as well as any trade unions, employers’ associations and commissions 
constituted on the basis of parity which lay down working conditions under canon law for the 
remit of church employers which are interested in t he outcome of the process the opportunity 
to submit a written statement within three weeks, which period begins to run on the day of 
publication of the draft of the statutory instrument. The opportunity to submit a statement in 
particular also encompasses the question of whether the coverage of the provisions of the 
collective agreement is suited to achieving the legislative objectives under section  1 and, in 
particular, to countering predatory competition in respect of wage costs. If the statutory 
instrume nt is applicable to the care sector, the opportunity to submit a statement in particular 
also encompasses the issue of the extent to which the provisions of the collective agreement 
are suited to achieving the legislative objectives under section  11 (2). 
(4) If a request is made in accordance with subsection  (1), then after the expiry of the time 
limit under subsection  (3) the Committee as referred to in section  5 (1) sentence  1 of the 
Collective Agreements Act (Collective Agreements Committee) is involved.  If at least four of 
the members of the Committee vote for the application or the Committee does not submit a 
statement within a period of two months, then a statutory instrument may be issued in 
accordance with subsection  (1). If two or three of the membe rs of the Committee vote for the 
application, a statutory instrument can only be issued by the Federal Government.  
Section  8 
Employer’s obligation to guarantee working conditions  
(1) Employers established in Germany or abroad which are included in the scop e of 
application of a collective agreement as referred to in section  3 sentence  1 no.  1 which has 
been declared universally applicable or of a statutory instrument as referred to in section  7 or 
section  7a are oblig ated to guarantee their workers at least those working conditions which 
are prescribed under the collective agreement for their place of employment and to pay 
those contributions to a joint facility of the parties to the collective agreement which are due Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 7 of 27 under section  5 no.  3. Sentence  1 applies  regardless of whether the corresponding 
obligation exists by dint of coverage under section  3 of the Collective Agreements Act, by 
dint of declaration of general applicability under section  5 of the Collective Agreements Act 
or on the basis of a statutory  instrument as referred to in section  7 or section  7a. 
(2) Employers are obligated to comply with a collective agreement as referred to in section  3 
sentence  1 no.  1, to the extent that it sets out working conditions as referred to in section 5 
sentence  1 no. 2 to no.  4, as well as a collective agreement which, pursuant to a statutory 
instrument as referred to in section  7 or section  7a, extends to employers and workers not 
bound by it even if they are bound by another collective agreement under section  3 of the 
Collective Agreements Act or by dint of a declaration of general applicability under section  5 
of the Collective Agreements Act.  
(3) Where a temporary agency worker is employed by a user enterprise to carry out tasks 
which are covered by a collective  agreement as referred to in section  3 sentence  1 no.  1, to 
the extent that it sets out working conditions as referred to in section  5 sentence  1 no.  2 to 
no. 4, or by a statutory instrument as referred to in section  7 or section  7a, the temporary 
work age ncy is required to at least guarantee those working conditions which are prescribed 
under that collective agreement or statutory instrument and to pay the contributions due to 
the joint facility under that collective agreement; the same applies if the user  enterprise’s 
enterprise does not carry out the sector -specific activities to which that collective agreement 
or statutory instrument applies.  
Section  9 
Waiver, forfeiture  
Waiver of the workers’ entitlement under a statutory instrument as referred to in se ction  7 or 
section  7a to minimum pay rates in accordance with section  5 sentence  1 no.  1 is only 
permissible under a court settlement; in all other cases, such waiver is ruled out. Forfeiture 
of the entitlement referred to in sentence  1 is ruled out. Exclu sion periods relating to the 
assertion of the entitlement referred to in sentence  1 may only be set out in the collective 
agreement on which the statutory instrument pursuant to section  7 or section  7a is based; 
the period must be at least six months.  
Division 4 
Working conditions in care sector  
Section  10 
Scope of application  
The provisions of this Division apply to the care sector. It encompasses enterprises and 
independent departments which predominantly provide outpatient, day -care or inpatient care 
services or outpatient nursing services for persons requiring nursing care (care enterprises). 
ʻPersons requiring nursing careʼ are persons with health -related impairments of their 
autonomy or capacities on account of which they are temporarily or permanently reliant on 
the help of others and are unable to independently compensate for or overcome ph ysical, 
cognitive or mental impairments or health -related stresses or demands. Facilities whose 
focus is on providing preventive healthcare services, medical rehabilitation services, services 
relating to participation in working life or life in the communi ty, schooling or the education of 
sick or disabled persons, as well as hospitals are not ʻcare enterprisesʼ within the meaning of 
sentence  2. 
Section  11 
Statutory instrument  
(1) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs may determine, by way of a statutory 
instrument not requiring the approval of the Bundesrat, that the working conditi ons under 
section  5 no.  1 and no.  2 proposed by the commission established in accordance with 
section  12 apply to all employers and workers covered by a recommendation as referred to 
in section  12a (2). Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 8 of 27 (2) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs  is required, when taking its decision in 
accordance with subsection  (1), to give consideration to the legislative objectives under 
section  1, to ensuring the quality of care services and to the mandate of church and other 
social welfare organisations purs uant to section  11 (2) of Book Eleven of the Social Code 
(Sozialgesetzbuch XI ). 
(3) Before issuing a statutory instrument, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs 
gives the employers and workers covered by the scope of application of the statutor y 
instrument, the parties to collective agreements which at least in part cover the sector -
specific activities to which the statutory instrument applies, as well as commissions 
constituted on the basis of parity which lay down working conditions under cano n law for the 
remit of church employers in the care sector the opportunity to submit a written statement 
within three weeks, which period begins to run on the day of publication of the draft of the 
statutory instrument.  
Section  12 
Appointment of Commission  
(1) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs appoints a Standing Commission which 
takes decisions relating to recommendations on laying down working conditions in 
accordance with section  12a (2). 
(2) The Commission is appointed for a five -year pe riod. The Federal Ministry of Labour and 
Social Affairs may extend the period of the appointment if the Commission has already 
begun discussions on new recommendations but has not yet adopted a resolution on those 
recommendations. In such cases, the new Co mmission is appointed immediately after such 
resolution is adopted, though no later than three months following the expiry of its five -year 
appointment.  
(3) The Commission comprises eight members. The members of the Commission perform 
their tasks on a n hon orary  basis. They are not bound by instructions.  
(4) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs appoints eight suitable persons as 
ordinary members as well as eight suitable persons as their deputies, taking account of 
proposals made by bodies entit led to make proposals. ʻBodies entitled to make proposalsʼ 
are 
1. parties to collective agreements in the care sector, whereby  
a) trade unions or trade union federations responsible for collective bargaining 
in the care sector,  
b) employers’ associations or federations of employ ers’ associations 
responsible for collective bargaining in the care sector  
are each entitled to propose two ordinary members and two deputies and  
2. the employees’ side and the employers’ side of commissions constituted on the 
basis of parity which lay dow n working conditions under canon law for the remit of church 
employers in the care sector, whereby  
a) the employees’ side and  
b) the employers’ side  
are each entitled to propose two ordinary members and two deputies.  
Bodies entitled to make proposals which  belong to the same groups as referred to in 
sentence  2 no.  1 (a) to no.  2 (b) may make joint proposals.  
(5) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs issues a call for proposals within a time 
limit which it is to determine. No account is to be tak en of any proposals received following 
the expiry of the time limit. The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs reviews the 
proposals and may require that facts relevant to the review be submitted and credibly Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 9 of 27 substantiated within a time limit which  it is to determine. No account is to be taken of any 
facts submitted and credibly substantiated following the expiry of the time limit.  
(6) If the number of proposals submitted exceeds the number of seats on the Commission 
accorded to one of the groups re ferred to in subsection  (4) sentence  2, it is for the Federal 
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs to decide which proposals are to be followed. The 
following is to be taken into consideration when taking this decision:  
1. in the case of several proposals  made by trade unions or trade union 
federations responsible for collective bargaining in the care sector: their representativity,  
2. in the case of several proposals made by employers’ associations or 
federations of employers’ associations responsible for  collective bargaining in the care 
sector: the mapping of the diversity of charitable, public and private organisations as well 
as, in equal measure, the representativity of the respective association or federation.  
The representativity of a trade union or  trade union federation is assessed on the basis of 
the number of members of the respective trade union or trade union federation employed as 
workers in the care sector and of the trade unions which are members of that federation. The 
representativity of a n employers’ association is assessed on the basis of the number of 
workers employed in the care sector whose employers are members of the respective 
employers’ association and may be bound by collective agreement depending on their type 
of membership. The representativity of a federation of employers’ associations is assessed 
on the basis of the number of workers employed in the care sector whose employers  
1. are members of the federation and may be bound by collective agreement 
depending on their type of m embership, or  
2. are members of employers’ associations which are members of that federation 
and may be bound by collective agreement depending on their type of membership and 
membership of the respective employers’ association.  
Where joint proposals are s ubmitted as per subsection  (4) sentence  3, the relevant numbers 
of workers assigned to the bodies entitled to make proposals are to be added together.  
(7) If an ordinary member or a deputy retires from the Commission, the Federal Ministry of 
Labour and Soc ial Affairs appoints another suitable person. If, when appointing that retired 
ordinary member or deputy, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs followed a 
proposal made by a body entitled to make proposals or, if in the case of a joint proposal  
having been made as per subsection  (4) sentence  3, it followed a proposal made by bodies 
entitled to make proposals, the new appointment is also made taking account of the proposal 
made. If the body or bodies do not propose a suitable person within a suit able time limit to be 
determined by the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, the decision on the 
appointment is taken by the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs. Subsection  (5) 
sentence  3 and sentence  4 applies accordingly.  
(8) Actions against the appointment of members by the Federal Ministry of Labour and 
Social Affairs do not have suspensive effect.  
Section  12a 
Recommendations on working conditions  
(1) The Commission begins discussions upon application by a body entitled to make 
propo sals pursuant to section  12 (4) sentence  2. If the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social 
Affairs has given notice that negotiations have begun concerning a collective agreement 
within the meaning of section  7a (1a) sentence  1, then three quarters of the me mbers of 
those groups referred to in section  12 (4) sentence  2 no.  2 (a) and (b) may jointly call for 
discussions on new recommendations to begin or to continue no earlier than four months 
following expiry of the time limit for the appointment of commissio ns pursuant to section  7a 
(1a) sentence  2. Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 10 of 27 (2) The Commission adopts recommendations on laying down working conditions as set out 
in section  5 sentence  1 no.  1 or no.  2. In doing so, the Commission takes account of the 
objectives under section  1 and sectio n 11 (2). Recommended minimum pay rates are 
generally to be differentiated by type of task performed by workers or their qualifications. 
Recommendations are generally to apply for a period of at least 24 months. The 
Commission may recommend an exclusion pe riod which meets the requirements of section  
9 sentence  3. Reasons for the recommendations are to be given in writing.  
(3) The Commission adopts a resolution if at least three quarters of the members  
1. of those groups referred to in section  12 (4) sentenc e 2 no.  1 (a) and (b),  
2. of those groups referred to in section  12 (4) sentence  2 no.  2 (a) and (b),  
3. of those groups referred to in section 12  (4) sentence  2 no.  1 (a) and no.  2 (a), 
and 
4. of those groups referred to in section  12 (4) sentence  2 no.  1 (b) and no.  2 (b) 
are present and in favour. Ordinary members may be represented by their respective 
deputies.  
(4) The meetings of the Commission are chaired by an authorised representative of the 
Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, who does no t have voting rights. The meetings 
are not public. The substance of the discussions is confidential. The Commission regularly 
calls in a representative of the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and of the 
Federal Ministry of Health, who has no v oting rights, to participate in its meetings. Further 
details are to be set out in the Commission’s Rules of Procedure.  
(5) Participation in meetings of the Commission as well as the adoption of resolutions may, 
in justified exceptional cases, take place b y means of a video conference or telephone 
conference if  
1. no member of the Commission immediately objects to this procedure,  
2. the representative of the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs does not 
immediately object to this procedure and  
3. it is ensured that third parties will have no knowledge of the content of the 
meeting.  
Section  13 
Legal consequences  
The regulations of a statutory instrument as referred to in section  7a take precedence over 
the regulations of a statutory instrument as ref erred to in section  11 to the extent that the 
scopes of application of those statutory instruments overlap. Notwithstanding sentence  1, a 
statutory instrument as referred to in section  11 is equal to a statutory instrument as referred 
to in section  7 as re gards the application of sections  8 and 9 as well as of Divisions  5 and 6.  
Division  4a 
Working conditions in trade in cross -border transport of euro cash  
Section  13a 
Equal status  
Regulation (EU) No  1214/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of  16 
November 2011 on the professional cross -border transport of euro cash by road between 
euro-area Member States (OJ L 316, 29.11.2011, p.  1) is equal to a statutory instrument as 
referred to in section  7 as regards the application of sections  8 and 9 as well as of Divisions  
5 and 6.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 11 of 27 Division  4b 
Additional working conditions for workers employed in Germany for more than 12  
months by employers established abroad  
Section  13b 
Additional working conditions  
(1) If a worker is employed in Germany for more than 1 2 months by an employer established 
abroad, then after the 12 -month period of employment in Germany not only the working 
conditions under Divisions  2 to 4a apply to the employment relationship but also all those 
working conditions which are prescribed, at the place of employment, under legal and 
administrative provisions and under collective agreements with general applicability, though 
not 
1. procedures, formalities and conditions relating to the conclusion or termination 
of the employment relationship, in cluding post -contractual non -competition clauses, and  
2. occupational pension schemes.  
Section  2 (2) applies accordingly.  
(2) If the employer submits notification before the expiry of a 12 -month period of employment 
in Germany, then the period after the ex piry of which the additional working conditions as 
referred to subsection  (1) apply to the workers concerned is extended to 18  months. 
Notification must be made in text form as per section  126b of the Civil Code ( Bürgerliches 
Gesetzbuch ) in German to the c ompetent customs authority and must contain the following 
particulars:  
1. the family name, given names and date of birth of the workers,  
2. the place of employment in Germany, in the case of building services the 
building site,  
3. the reasons for exceeding  the 12 -month period of employment in Germany, and  
4. the duration of the employment in Germany as anticipated at the point at which 
notification is made.  
The competent customs authority confirms receipt of such notification.  
(3) The Federal Ministry of Fi nance may, in consultation with the Federal Ministry of Labour 
and Social Affairs, determine, by way of a statutory instrument not requiring the approval of 
the Bundesrat,  
1. that, in which manner and under which technical and organisational conditions 
notification may, in derogation from subsection  (2) sentence  2, only be made in electronic 
form,  
2. in which manner receipt of notification by the competent authority referred to in 
subsection  (2) sentence  3 may be confirmed.  
(4) The Federal Ministry of Finan ce may determine the competent authority referred to in 
subsection  (2) by way of a statutory instrument not requiring the approval of the Bundesrat.  
Section  13c 
Calculating period of employment in Germany  
(1) Where workers are employed in Germany under con tracts for work or services, account 
is taken, when calculating the period of employment in Germany, of all those periods in 
which they are employed under those contracts in Germany.  
(2) Where workers are employed in one of their employer’s enterprises in Germany or in a 
company affiliated to their employer in accordance with section  15 of the Stock Corporation 
Act (Aktiengesetz ) in Germany, account is taken, when calculating the period of employment Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 12 of 27 in Germany, of all those periods in which they are employ ed in the enterprise in Germany or 
in the affiliated company in Germany.  
(3) Where the employer established abroad, in the capacity as temporary work agency, 
temporarily supplies a temporary agency worker to a user enterprise in Germany, account is 
taken, when calculating the period of employment in Germany, of all those periods in which 
the temporary agency worker is employed in Germany under the supply contract. Where a 
user enterprise established abroad employs a temporary agency worker in Germany, 
subse ctions  (1) and (2) apply accordingly.  
(4) Any interruption of a worker’s or temporary agency worker’s activity in Germany is not 
regarded as termination of the employment in Germany when calculating the period of 
employment in Germany. No account is taken,  when calculating the period of employment, 
of any periods in which the essential obligations of the parties to the employment contract 
rest or in which a person is employed abroad.  
(5) Where workers were employed in accordance with subsection  (1), (2) or (3) and that 
employment continues in Germany in accordance with subsection  (1), (2) or (3) immediately 
following such a period of employment, the two periods are added together when calculating 
the period of employment in Germany.  
(6) Where workers are emp loyed in Germany and their employment does not constitute 
employment in accordance with subsection  (1), (2) or (3), account is taken, when calculating 
the period of employment in Germany, of all those periods in which they are employed 
without interruption  in Germany.  
(7) Where an employer or the user enterprise established abroad as referred to in subsection  
(3) sentence  2 replaces a worker employed in Germany with another worker who performs 
the same tasks at the same place, the period of employment of th e replaced worker is added 
to the period of employment of the replacing worker. A task is ʻthe same taskʼ within the 
meaning of sentence  1 if a worker essentially performs the same activities  as the worker 
whom he or she replaces and if these activities  
1. are performed under the same contracts for work or services,  
2. are, in the case of tasks performed in one of the employer’s enterprises or 
affiliated companies, performed in the same enterprise or affiliated company in Germany, 
or 
3. are performed in the  capacity as a temporary agency worker for the same user 
enterprise established in Germany.  
A worker performs the task ʻat the same placeʼ within the meaning of sentence  1 if he or she  
1. performs the task at the same address or in the immediate vicinity of the same 
address as the worker whom he or she is replacing, or  
2. performs the task at other addresses as set out in those contracts for work or 
services under the same contracts for work or services as the worker whom he or she is 
replacing.  
(8) Where a worker is employed by an employer established in another Member State of the 
European Union or the European Economic A rea as a driver or co -driver (driver) as referred 
to in section 36  (1) in Germany, for the purposes of calculating the period of employment in 
Germany, the periods of this employment  
1. in derogation from subsection (5) are not added together with  the peri ods of an 
employment in  Germany that immediately follows,  
2. in derogation from subsection (7) are not added together with the periods of 
employment of the driver replaced . Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 13 of 27 Division  5 
Enforcement under civil law  
Section  14 
Employer’s liability  
An entrepren eur who contracts another entrepreneur with the performance of work or the 
provision of services is liable for the obligations of that entrepreneur, of a subcontractor or of 
a temporary work agency contracted by the entrepreneur or subcontractor as regards  
payment of the minimum pay to workers or of contributions to a joint facility of the parties to a 
collective agreement under section  8 as a surety who has waived the defence of failure to 
pursue remedies. ʻMinimum payʼ within the meaning of sentence  1 onl y encompasses that 
amount which is to be paid to workers after deduction of taxes and contributions paid 
towards social security and the promotion of employment or corresponding social security 
expenses (net pay).  
Section  15 
Legal venue  
Workers who are or were employed within the area of application of this Act by employers 
established abroad may also file an action in respect of their period of employment within the 
area of application of this Act for the fulfilment of obligations under section  2, 8, 13b o r 14 
before a German court with jurisdiction in employment matters. This option is also available 
to a joint facility of the parties to a collective agreement in accordance with section  5 
sentence  1 no.  3 in respect of the contributions due to it.  
Section  15a 
User enterprise’s information requirements as regards temporary workers posted 
across borders  
(1) Before a user enterprise established abroad employs a temporary agency worker in 
Germany, it informs the temporary work agency thereof in text form as per  section  126b of 
the Civil Code.  
(2) Before a user enterprise established in Germany or abroad employs a temporary agency 
worker hired by a temporary work agency established abroad in Germany, the user 
enterprise informs the temporary work agency in text f orm as per section  126b of the Civil 
Code about the essential working conditions which apply in the user enterprise’s enterprise 
to the user enterprise’s comparable workers, including remuneration. The information 
requirement does not apply if the precondi tions for deviating from the principle of equality 
under section  8 (2) and (4) sentence  2 of the Act on Temporary Agency Work 
(Arbeitnehmerüberlassungsgesetz ) are met. Section  13 of the Act on Temporary Agency 
Work remains unaffected.  
Division  6 
Control an d enforcement by governmental agencies  
Section  16 
Competence  
The customs authorities are responsible for examining whether an employer is complying 
with the obligations under section  8, insofar as these relate to the guarantee of working 
conditions under s ection  5 sentence  1 no.  1 to no.  4. 
Section  17 
Powers of customs authorities and other authorities  
Sections  2 to 6, 14, 15, 20, 22 and 23 of the Act to Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful 
Employment ( Schwarzarbeitsbekämpfungsgesetz ) apply accordingly, with  the proviso that  
1. the authorities referred to therein are also permitted to inspect employment 
contracts, records made in accordance with section  2 of the Act on Proof of the Existence 
of an Employment Relationship ( Nachweisgesetz ) and other business do cuments which Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 14 of 27 indirectly or directly provide information about compliance with the working conditions in 
accordance with section  8, 
2. those required to cooperate in accordance with section  5 (1) of the Act to 
Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment  are required to submit these 
documents, and  
3. the customs authorities are authorised, where there is an imminent danger to 
public security and order, to enter accommodation provided to workers by an employer at 
any time of day or night in order to examin e whether the working conditions under section  
5 sentence  1 no.  4 are being complied with.  
Sections  16 to 19 of the Act to Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment apply. 
Section  6 (4) of the Act to Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment appl ies 
accordingly. Section  67 (3) no.  4 of Book Ten of the Social Code ( Sozialgesetzbuch X ) does 
not apply to data processing which serves the purpose referred to in section  16 or 
cooperation with authorities in the European Economic Area pursuant to section  20 (2). The 
basic right to inviolability of the home (Article 13 of the Basic Law ( Grundgesetz )) is 
restricted on account of sentence  1 no.  3. 
Section  18 
Notification requirement  
(1) Where working conditions apply to an employment relationship whose compl iance is 
controlled by the customs authorities pursuant to section  16, an employer established 
abroad who employs a worker or several workers within the area of application of this Act is 
required, before the start of each work or service, to submit writte n notification in German to 
the competent customs authority which contains all the particulars which are essential for the 
audit. The following particulars are ʻessentialʼ:  
1. the family name, given names and date of birth of those workers employed by 
the employer within the area of application of this Act,  
2. the start and anticipated duration of the employment,  
3. the place of employment, in the case of building services the building site,  
4. the place in Germany where the documents as required under sect ion 19 are 
kept available,  
5. the family name, given names, date of birth and address in Germany of the 
person responsible,  
6. the sector in which the workers are to be posted, and  
7. the family name, given names and address in Germany of an authorised 
recipient, unless such person is identical to the person responsible referred to in no.  5. 
The employer referred to in sentence  1 is required immediately to notify any changes to 
these particulars.  
(2) In derogation from subsection (1), an employer establishe d in another Member State of 
the European Union or the European Economic Area is required before the employment of a 
driver for the provision of transport services for goods or passengers in Germany as referred 
to in section 36  (1) starts to transmit to th e competent customs authority a notification in 
electronic form which contains the following particulars:  
1. the identity of the operator , where this is available in the fo rm of the number of 
the C ommun ity licence , 
2. the family name and given name as well  as address in the State of 
establishment of an authorised recipient , Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 15 of 27 3. the family name, given name, date of birth, address and the number of the 
driving licence of the driver,  
4. the s tart date of the driver’s contract  of employment  and the law applicabl e to it , 
5. the anticipated start and end dates of the driver’s employment in Germany,  
6. the number plates  of the motor vehicles to be used for the employment in 
Germany,  
7. whether the transport services to be performed  by the driver are the carriage of 
goods or passengers and international carriage or cabotage operations;  
the notification must be transmitted using the electronic interface of the Internal Market 
Information System within the meaning of Article 1 in conjunction with Article 5  (a) of 
Regula tion (EU) No 1024/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 
2012 on administrative cooperation through the Internal Market Information System and 
repealing Commission Decision 2008/49/EC (‘the IMI Regulation’) (OJ L 316, 14.11.2012, p. 
1) as last amended by Regulation (EU) 2020/1055 (OJ L 249, 31.7.2020, p. 17). Subsection 
(1) sentence 3 applies accordingly.  
(3) Where a temporary work agency established abroad temporarily supplies a worker or 
several workers to perform work for a user  enterprise, th e temporary work agency  is 
required, under the conditions of subsection  (1) sentence  1, to transmit  written notification in 
German to the competent customs authority before the start of each work or service which 
contains the following parti culars:  
1. the family name, given names and date of birth of the workers who are being 
temporarily supplied,  
2. the start and duration of the posting,  
3. the place of employment, in the case of building services the building site,  
4. the place in Germany w here the documents as required under section  19 are 
kept available,  
5. the family name, given names and address in Germany of an authorised 
recipient for the temporary work agency,  
6. the sector in which the workers are to be posted, and  
7. the family name , given names or company name, as well as the address of the 
user enterprise . 
Subsection  (1) sentence  3 applies accordingly.  
(4) The Federal Ministry of Finance may, in consultation with the Federal Ministry of Labour 
and Social Affairs, determine, by way of a statutory instrument not requiring the approval of 
the Bundesrat,  
1. that, in which manner and under which technical and organisational conditions 
notification, a notification of changes and an assurance may, in derogation from 
subsection  (1) sentence  1 and sentence  3, subsection  (2) and subsection  (3) sentence  1 
and sentence  2, and subsection  (4), be submitted in electronic form,  
2. under which conditions no notification of changes need be made by way of 
exception, and  
3. how the notification procedur e can be simplified or modified insofar as the 
posted workers are employed in the context of regularly recurring work or services or 
other specific features of the work to be performed or the services to be provided so 
require.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 16 of 27 (5) The Federal Ministry of Finance may determine the competent authority as referred to in 
subsection  (1) sentence  1 and subsection  (3) sentence  1 by way of a statutory instrument 
not requiring the approval of the Bundesrat.  
Section  19 
Preparation and keeping available of documents  
(1) Where working conditions apply to an employment relationship whose compliance is 
controlled by the customs authorities pursuant to section  16, the employer is required to 
record the start, end and length of a worker’s daily working time and, insofar as  hourly 
allowances are to be paid, the start, end and length of the working time which establishes an 
entitlement to the allowance, including information regarding the relevant allowance, and to 
do so no later than the end of the seventh calendar day follo wing the day on which the work 
was performed, and to retain these records for at least two years from the effective date 
applicable to the record. Sentence  1 applies accordingly to a user enterprise to which a 
temporary work agency temporarily supplies a w orker or several workers to perform work.  
(2) Each employer is required to keep available, in Germany and in German, those 
documents which are required for the monitoring of those working conditions whose 
compliance is monitored by the customs authorities pursuant to section  16 for the entire 
duration of the workers’ actual employment within the area of application of this Act, at least 
for the duration of the entire work or service, but no longer than two years overall. Upon the 
request of the audit author ity, the documents are also to be kept available at the place of 
employment, in the case of building services on the building site.  
(2a) In derogation from subsection (2), an employer established in another Member State of 
the European Union or the Europea n Economic Area must ensure that the driver employed 
to provide transport services for goods or passengers in Germany as referred to in section 
36 (1) has at his or her disposal the following documents in paper or electronic form:  
1. a copy of the notifica tion transmitted in compliance with section 18  (2), 
2. evidence of the transport operations, in particular electronic consignment notes 
or the evidence mentioned  in Article 8  (3) of Regulation (EC) No  1072/2009 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council  of 21 October 2009 on common rules for access 
to the in ternational road haulage market  (OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 72) , as last amended 
by Regulation (EU) 2020/1055 (OJ L 249, 31.7.2020, p. 17) , and 
3. all tachograph  records and  in particular the country sy mbols  mentioned in 
Article 34  (6) (f) and (7) of Regulation (EU) No  165/2014 of the European Parliament and 
of the Council of 4 February 2014 on tachographs in road transport, repealing Council 
Regulation (EEC) No 3821/85 on recording equipment in road tra nsport and amending 
Regulation (EC) No 561/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the 
harmonisation of certain social legislation relating to road transport  (OJ L 60, 28.2.2014, 
p. 1), as last amen ded by Regulation (EU) 2020/1054  (OJ L 249, 31.7.2020, p. 1) , of the 
Member States in which the driver was present  when carrying out international road 
transport operations or cabotage operations or the recordings as referred to in section 1  
(6) sentences 1 and 2 of the Vehicle Crew Ordinance ( Fahrp ersonalverordnung ) of 27 
June 2005  (Federal Law Gazette I, p.  1882), as last amended by Article 1 of the 
Ordinance of 8 August 2017  (Federal Law Gazette I, p.  3158).  
Where employed in Germany as referred to in section 36  (1), the driver must keep the 
docum ents placed at his or her disposal in accordance with sentence 1 and produce them to 
the customs authorities on request in paper or electronic form; if not employed in Germany 
as referred to in section 36  (1), the obligation under the first half -sentence a pplies only in the 
framework of a roadside check in respect of the documents as referred to in sentence 1 nos. 
2 and 3.  
(2b) After the employment period in Germany of a driver as referred to in section 36  (1) has 
ended, the employer established in another Member State of the European Union or the Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 17 of 27 European Economic Area must on request send to the customs authorities via the electronic 
interface connected to the Internal Market Information System the following documents 
within eight weeks from the date of th e request:  
1. copies of the documents as required by subsec tion (2a) sentence 1 nos. 2 and  
3, 
2. documentation relating to the remuneration of the driver including proof of 
payments , 
3. the employment contract or an equivalent document within the meaning o f 
Article 3  (1) of Council Directive 91/533/EEC of 14 October 1991 on an employer's 
obligation to inform employees of the conditions applicable to the contract or employment 
relationship  (OJ L 288, 18.10.1991, p. 32) and  
4. time-recording docum entation rel ating to the driver’ s work, in particular 
tachograph records.  
The customs authorities may request the documents as referred to in sentence 1 only for 
such period of employment as referred to in section 36  (1) which at the date of the request 
has ended.  
If, notwithstanding employment in Germany within the meaning of section 36  (1), a 
notification as required by section 18  (2) was not transmitted, the employer established in 
another Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area must on 
request send to the customs authorities the documents as referred to in sentence 1, outside 
of the electronic interface connected to the Internal Market Information System, in paper or 
electronic form.  
(3) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs may,  by way of a statutory instrument 
not requiring the approval of the Bundesrat, restrict the employer’s , the temporary work 
agency’s  or a user enterprise’s obligations under section  18 and subsections  (1) and (2) in 
respect of individual sectors or groups o f workers.  
(4) The Federal Ministry of Finance may, in consultation with the Federal Ministry of Labour 
and Social Affairs, determine, by way of a statutory instrument not requiring the approval of 
the Bundesrat, how the employer’s obligation to record the  actual and allowance -related 
working time of those workers whom that employer employs and to retain those records can 
may be simplified or modified insofar as the specific features of the work to be performed or 
service to be provided or the specific feat ures of the sector so require.  
Section  20 
Cooperation between domestic and foreign authorities  
(1) The customs authorities notify the competent local Land  financial authorities of 
notifications submitted in accordance with section  18 (1) and (3).  The Land  financial 
authorities may access using the Internal Market Information System information related to 
the notifications submitted in accordance with section 18  (2). 
(2) The customs authorities and other authorities referred to in section  2 of the Act to 
Com bat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment may, in accordance with data 
protection regulations, also cooperate with authorities in other Contracting States to the 
Agreement on the European Economic Area which are responsible for carrying out tasks 
corresp onding to those under this Act or for combating illegal employment or which can 
provide information about whether an employer is fulfilling the obligations under section  8. 
Rules governing international mutual assistance in criminal matters remain unaffect ed 
thereby.  
(3) The customs authorities notify the Central Trade and Industry Register of any decisions 
on regulatory fines in accordance with section  23 (1) to (3) once they have become final if 
the fine amounts to more than 200  euros.  
(4) (repealed)  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 18 of 27 Sect ion 21 
Exclusion from public procurement procedures  
(1) Applicants on whom a fine of at least 2,500 euros has been imposed on account of a 
breach of section 23  (1) nos. 1 to 9 and 11 or (2) are generally to be excluded from 
participating in a tender for a delivery, construction or service contract of one of the 
contracting authorities referred to in sections  99 and 100 of the Act against Restraints of 
Competition ( Gesetz gegen Wettbewerbsbeschränkungen ) for an appropriate period until 
their reliability has been proven to be re -established. The same applies even before 
regulatory fines proceedings are conducted where, in an individual case, the body of 
evidence leaves no reasonable doubt as to serious misconduct within the meaning of 
sentence  1. 
(2) The autho rities responsible for prosecuting or punishing the regulatory offences referred 
to in section  23 (1) nos. 1 to 9 and 11 or (2)  may, upon request, provide the information 
required to the public contracting authorities referred to in section  99 of the Act a gainst 
Restraints of Competition and to those agencies which keep pre -qualification directories or 
directories of entrepreneurs and suppliers admitted by public contracting authorities.  
(3) Within the framework of their activities, the public contracting a uthorities referred to in 
subsection  (2) request information from the Competition  Register regarding final decisions 
on regulatory fines imposed on account of one of the regulatory offences referred to in 
section  23 (1) nos. 1 to 9 and 11 or (2) or request  applicants to make a declaration stating 
that the conditions for exclusion referred to in subsection  (1) are not met. Where an applicant 
makes a declaration, the public contracting authorities referred to in subsection  (2) may at 
any time request addition al information from the Competition  Register.  
(4) In the case of contracts worth more than 30,000  euros, a public contracting authority as 
referred to in subsection  (2) requests information from the Competition  Register concerning 
the applicant who is to b e awarded the contract.  
(5) Applicants are to be heard before a decision is taken on their exclusion.  
Section  22 
(repealed)  
Section  23 
Regulatory fines provisions  
(1) Whoever intentionally or negligently,  
1. contrary to section  8 (1) sentence  1 or (3), doe s not guarantee a working 
condition whose compliance is checked by the customs authorities pursuant to section  
16, or does not do so in good time, or does not pay a contribution or does not do so in 
good time,  
2. contrary to section  17 sentence  1, in conju nction with section  5 (1) sentence  1 
no. 1 or no.  3 of the Act to Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment, does not 
acquiesce to or does not cooperate with an audit,  
3. contrary to section  17 sentence  1, in conjunction with section  5 (1) sentence  1 
no. 2 of the Act to Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment, does not 
acquiesce to entry into property or business premises,  
4. contrary to section  17 sentence  1, in conjunction with section  5 (5) sentence  1 
of the Act to Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment, does not transmit 
data, does not do so correctly, in full, in the prescribed manner or in good time,  
5. contrary to section  18 (1) sentence  1, (2) sentence 1  or (3) sentence  1, does not 
submit notification, does not do so correctly, in  full, in the prescribed manner or in good 
time, or does not transmit  notification, does not do so correctly, in full, in the prescribed 
manner or in good time,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 19 of 27 6. contrary to section  18 (1) sentence  3, also in conjunction with (2) sentence 2 or 
(3) senten ce 2, does not give notification of changes, does not do so correctly, in full, in 
the prescribed manner or in good time,  
7. contrary to section  19 (1) sentence  1, also in conjunction with sentence  2, does 
not prepare records, does not do so correctly, in full or in good time, or does not retain 
them or does not do so for at least two years,  
8. contrary to section  19 (2), does not keep available a document, does not do so 
correctly, in full or in the prescribed manner,  
9. contrary to section 19  (2a) sentenc e 1, does not ensure that the documents 
mentioned therein are available,  
10. contrary to section 19  (2a) sentence 2, does not produce a document, does not 
do so correctly, in full, in the prescribed manner or in good time, or  
11. contrary to section 19  (2b) sentence 1 or 3, does not submit a document, does 
not do so correctly, in full, in the prescribed manner or in good time,  
is deemed to have committed a regulatory offence.  
(2) Whoever has a significant amount of work performed or services provided by con tracting, 
in the capacity as entrepreneur, another entrepreneur and knows or negligently does not 
know that that entrepreneur, in fulfilling that contract,  
1. contrary to section  8 (1) sentence  1 or (3), does not guarantee a working 
condition whose complia nce is checked by the customs authorities pursuant to section  
16, does not do so in good time, or does not pay a contribution or does not do so in good 
time, or  
2. uses a subcontractor or permits a subcontractor to act who, contrary to section  
8 (1) senten ce 1 or (3), does not guarantee a working condition whose compliance is 
checked by the customs authorities pursuant to section  16, or does not do so in good 
time, or does not pay a contribution or does not do so in good time,  
is deemed to have committed a regulatory offence.  
(3) In the cases referred to in subsection  (1) no.  1 and subsection  (2), a fine of up to 500,000  
euros, in all other cases a fine of up to 30,000  euros, may be imposed for the regulatory 
offence.  
(4) ʻAdministrative authoritiesʼ within the meaning of section  36 (1) no.  1 of the Act on 
Regulatory Offences ( Gesetz über Ordnungswidrigkeiten ) are those authorities referred to in 
section  16, each in respect of their remit.  
(5) The Federal Administrative Enforcement Act ( Verwaltungs -Vollstreck ungsgesetz des 
Bundes ) applies to enforcement, by the authorities referred to in section  16, in favour of 
federal authorities and legal entities under public law directly under Federal Government 
control, as well as to enforcement, by the authorities refer red to in section  16, of asset 
seizure in accordance with section  111e of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Strafprozeßordnung ) in conjunction with section  46 of the Act on Regulatory Offences.  
Division 7  
Cross -border enforcement  
Section 24  
Scope  
This Divisi on governs the handling of requests from or to another Member State of the 
European Union or the European Economic Area in accordance with Chapter VI of Directive 
2014/67/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on the 
enforcement of  Directive 96/71/EC concerning the posting of workers in the framework of the 
provision of services and amending Regulation (EU) No 1024/2012 on administrative Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 20 of 27 cooperation through the Internal Market Information System (‘the IMI Regulation’) (OJ L 159, 
28.5.2014, p. 11) for  
1. the service of documents or the enforcement of financial administrative 
penalties or fines including fees and surcharges imposed on an employer established in 
Germany for failure to comply with the applicable rules on the posting of w orkers from  
one Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area to another 
Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area (incoming 
requests),  
2. the service of documents or the enforcement of fines imposed on an employer  
established in another Member State of the European Union or the European Economic 
Area for failure to comply with the applicable rules on the posting of workers in Germany  
(outgoing requests).  
Rules on the handling of requests for the service of document s or the enforcement of 
financial administrative penalties or fines set out in other laws or international agreements 
take precedence.  
Section 25  
Competence  
(1) The central authority for the purposes of this Division is the Federal Office for 
Enforcement b y Customs in the Main Customs Office Hannover.  
(2) The competent authorities for service and enforcement in Germany (enforcement 
authorities) for the purposes of this Division are in relation to incoming requests the 
authorities that are competent in accor dance with section 23  (4). In relation to outgoing 
requests the prevailing competence applies.  
(3) The central authority and the enforcement authorities must provide each other without 
delay with the information necessary for the processing of incoming and  outgoing requests.  
Section 26  
Internal Market Information System  
For the cross -border processing of incoming and outgoing requests the central authority 
uses the Internal Market Information System established under Regulation (EU) No 
1024/2012.  
Section 27  
Content of outgoing requests  
Outgoing requests must include at least the following particulars:  
1. the name and known address of the enforcement debtor or addressee and 
further data to the extent necessary for the identification of the enforcement debtor or 
addressee,  
2. a summary of the facts and circumstances of the infringement, the nature of the 
offence and the relevant applicable rules,  
3. the decision  to be enforced , the service or enforcement of which is requested, in 
the original or a certified cop y thereof and all other relevant information or documents, 
including those of a judicial nature, concerning the underlying fine,  
4. the name, address and other contact details  
a) regarding the competent au thority responsible for the fining decision  and 
b) the competent body where further information can be obtained concerning 
the fine or the possibilities for contesting the payment obligation or decision 
imposing it, if this body is different to the authority mentioned in letter (a),  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 21 of 27 5. in the case of a req uest for the service of documents, the purpose of the service 
and the period within which it must be effected,  
6. in the case of a request for the enforcement of an administrative penalty or fine  
a) the date when the decision has become  final,  
b) an indica tion of the nature and amount of the administrative penalty or fine,  
c) any dates relevant to the enforcement process, including whether, and if so 
how, the decision was served on the person or persons concerned and whether 
the decision was given in defaul t of appearance,  
d) a confirmation from the requesting authority that the administrative penalty or 
fine is not subject to any further appeal, and  
e) the underlying claim in respect of which the request is made and its different 
components.  
Section 28  
Hand ling of outgoing requests  
(1) Outgoing requests are drawn up by the enforcement authority after verifying that the 
requirements as referred to in subsections (2) and (3) are fulfilled. They are forwarded by the 
central authority to the competent authority of another Member State of the European Union 
or the European Economic Area.  
(2) The competent authority of another Member State of the European Union or the 
European Economic Area may be requested to serve any documents that are necessary for 
the determin ation of a fine for failure to comply with the applicable rules on the posting of 
workers in Germany or the enforcement thereof. A request for service as referred to in 
sentence 1 may only be made if the German enforcement authority itself is unable to ser ve 
the relevant document.  
(3) The competent authority of another Member State of the European Union or the 
European Economic Area may be requested to enforce a fine for failure to comply with the 
applicable rules on the posting of workers in Germany where  
1. the requirements for enf orcement in Germany would be satisfied , 
2. enforcement in Germany is not possible and  
3. the fine to be enforced has not been challenged or is no longer subject to 
challenge.  
(4) The central authority notifies without delay the c ompetent authority of another Member 
State of the European Union or the European Economic Area where  
1. a request for an extraordinary remedy is filed  challenging the fining decision to 
be enf orced or in relation to the fining  procedure that has become fin al by virtue of the 
decision or  
2. the German enforcement authority amends or withdraws the outgoing request.  
(5) Where a request for enforcement has been made to the competent authority of another 
Member State of the European Union or the European Economi c Area, enforcement in 
Germany is no longer permitted unless the request has been withdrawn or the requested 
authority has refused the enforcement.  
Section 29  
Handling of incoming requests  
(1) The central authority forwards incoming requests without delay to the enforcement 
authority. The central authority notifies the requesting authority without delay on each Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 22 of 27 occasion when one of the measures mentioned in subsections (2) to (4) has been executed. 
The notification must include in particular the date of any  service effected in accordance with 
subsection (3).  
(2) The enforcement authority takes the measures necessary for the service or enforcement 
of the request forwarded in accordance with subsection (1) sentence 1 and notifies the 
central authority of this on each occasion without delay. The decision imposing a financial 
administrative penalty or fine, the service or enforcement of which is requested, must be 
served and enforced in the same way as a fining decision taken by a public authority as 
referred to in section 23  (1) to (3). The Federal Republic of Germany waives in relation to the 
requesting Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area any 
entitlement to the reimbursement of the costs for the assistance in service and enforcement 
provided in accordance with this Act.  
(3) The enforcement authority takes without delay and at the latest within one month of 
receipt of the request by the central authority all measures necessary to serve on the 
employer established in Germany all the doc uments connected with a decision imposing a 
financial administrative penalty or fine or the enforcement thereof.  
(4) Where it comes to the enforcement authority’s attention that in the requesting Member 
State of the European Union or the European Economic Area a request for an extraordinary 
remedy has been filed by the employer concerned or by an interested party challenging the 
decision to be enforced or in relation to the fining procedure that has become final by virtue 
of the decision, the enforcement au thority suspends the enforcement procedure pending the 
decision in relation to the extraordinary remedy.  
(5) Claims are enforced in euros. Where a different currency is the basis for the financial 
administrative penalty or fine, the exchange rate of the Eu ropean Central Bank applicable on 
the date that the financial administrative penalty or fine was determined is decisive. The 
enforcement proceeds are credited to the Federal Cash Office where a Federal authority 
acts as enforcement authority, otherwise to the Land  cash office concerned.  
(6) Appeals challenging the service or enforcement of a financial administrative penalty or a 
fine are governed by the German rules on service and enforcement. Appeals against the 
decision underlying the service or enforceme nt requested are governed by the legislation of 
the requesting Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area.  
Section 30  
Refusal of incoming requests  
(1) The requested enforcement authority or the central authority may refuse an incoming  
request where  
1. the request does not contain the information required for outgoing requests in 
accordance with section 27 or  
2. the request manifestly does not correspond to the underlying decision.  
(2) The requested enforcement authority or the central authority may refuse an incoming 
request for enforcement in addition where  
1. the envisaged costs or resources required for the enforcement are 
disproportionate in relation to the amount of the administrative penalty or fine to be 
enforced,  
2. the administ rative penalty or the fine to be enforced or its equivalent in euro s 
amounts to less than 350 euros or  
3. the enforcement would not be compatible with the fundamental rights of the 
person or persons concerned or with other constitutional legal principles f or the protection 
of the person or persons concerned.  
(3) The enforcement authority notifies the refusal of an incoming request including the 
reasoning thereof to the central authority without delay. The central authority informs the Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 23 of 27 requesting authority w ithout delay. Before refusing an incoming request in accordance with 
subsection (1) no. 1 or 2, the central authority gives the requesting authority a period of one 
month within which it may transmit the missing information or complete the request.  
Divisio n 8 
Labour and social law advisory services  
Section  31 
Entitlement  
(1) The German Trade Union Federation (DGB) is entitled to up to 3.996 million  euros per 
calendar year in federal funding to establish and operate centres to provide advice on labour 
and so cial law matters as well as to develop and deliver training courses and information 
material linked to those advisory services.  
(2) This entitlement only exists if the advisory services  
1. are geared towards EU citizens who are employed, are to be employed  or were 
employed in Germany within the framework of the freedom of movement for workers or 
as workers posted across borders,  
2. are free of charge to those receiving advice, and  
3. do not require those receiving advice to be a member of a trade union.  
(3) The advisory centres referred to in subsection  (1) provide employees from third countries 
with information about suitable and available services provided by other competent advisory 
centres and refer such third -country nationals to those advisory centres.  Posted third -country 
nationals may be involved in the provision of advisory services if there is a direct factual link 
to a case already handled by one of the advisory services as referred to in subsections  (1) 
and (2). A direct factual link in particular  exists where third -country nationals and EU citizens 
are posted by the same employer.  
(4) Entitlement to the full amount only exists if the German Trade Union Federation also 
contributes own funding towards financing the advisory centres in the amount of one ninth of 
the amount of the approved funding. The beneficiary identifies the amount of the own 
funding in its application and uses it directly to fund the advisory centres. If the own 
contribution is not paid in full, previously approved funding is redu ced to the ninefold amount 
of the own contribution paid.  
(5) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs is the authority competent for granting 
the funding. It takes a decision on the beneficiary’s application by way of an administrative 
act. 
(6) Fo r the purposes of a numerical check, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs 
each year conducts at least two sample audits and one detailed audit relating to the use of 
the funding. For the purposes of a factual check, the German Trade Union Fede ration no 
later than three months after the end of the funding period submits a report on measures and 
activities carried out in the  funding  period.  
(7) Upon request and after the prior consent of the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social 
Affairs, the fund ing received may be passed on to third parties on the basis of a contract 
under private law. The beneficiary remains responsible and accountable for the appropriate 
use of the funding.  
(8) The entitlement arises for the first time in respect of the calenda r year 2021.  
(9) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs will, by 31 December 2025, conduct an 
evaluation of the range of advisory services and information provided.  
Section  32 
Authorisation to issue statutory instrument  
The Federal Ministry of L abour and Social Affairs determines, by way of a statutory 
instrument not requiring the approval of the Bundesrat,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 24 of 27 1. further details concerning the granting of the funding,  
2. the application procedure,  
3. the conditions and procedure for passing the fund ing made available on to third 
parties,  
4. further details concerning checks regarding the use of funds.  
Section 33 
Duty to provide information in cases of recruitment from abroad  
Employers established in Germany that conclude a contract of employment with  a Union 
citizen in accordance with section 31 (2) no. 1  with residence or habitual abode abroad for 
the purpose of performing work in Germany are to inform that person in writing no later than 
on the first day of performing work of the possibility of maki ng use  of the services of the 
advisory centres in accordance with section 31 and are to provide the current contact details 
of the advisory centre. If the worker  has been placed with the employer and the placement 
agent has a duty to provide information to  the worker  in accordance with section 299 of the 
Third Book of the Social Code, the obligation to provide information does not apply.  
Division  9 
Special rules and  transitional provisions  
Subdivision 1  
Special rules for certain activities  performed by work ers employed by employers 
established abroad  
Section 34  
Initial assembly and installation work  
The working conditions as referred to in section  2 (1) no.  1 and no.  2, section  5 sentence  1 
no. 1 to no.  3 and section  13b of this Act and as referred to in sec tion 20 of the Minimum 
Wage Act ( Mindestlohngesetz ) do not apply to workers employed in Germany by employers 
established abroad if  
1. those workers perform initial assembly or installation work which  
a) forms part of a supply contract,  
b) is essential in o rder to be able to bring  the delivered items into service , and  
c) is carried out by the supplier company’s skilled or semi -skilled workers, and  
2. the period of employment in Germany does not exceed eight day s within the 
space of one year.  
Sentence  1 does not apply to building services within the meaning of section  101 (2) of Book 
Three of the Social Code.  
Section 35  
Specific activities without a recipient of services in Germany  
The working conditions as referred to in section  2 (1) no.  1 and no.  2, section  5 sentence  1 
no. 1 to no.  4 and section  13b of this Act and as referred to in section  20 of the Minimum 
Wage Act do not apply to workers and temporary agency workers who are temporarily 
employed in Germany by employers or user enterprises established abro ad and who, whilst 
not performing work or providing services to third parties in Germany on behalf of their 
employer,  
1. hold meetings or conduct negotiations in Germany, draw up contractual offers 
or conclude contracts on behalf of their employer,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 25 of 27 2. attend as a visitor a trade fair, specialist conference or symposium without 
performing any of the activities  referred to in section  2a (1) no.  8 of the Act to Combat 
Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment,  
3. establish a business unit in Germany on behalf of  their employer, or  
4. are employed as a professional  by an international group or company for the 
purpose of providing in -house training in a group or business unit in Germany.  
Work is regarded as ʻtemporaryʼ if the worker is not active in Germany for more than 14 
consecutive  days and for no more than 30 days within the space of 12 months.  
Subdivision 2  
Special rules for the road transport sector  
Section 36  
Drivers employed in Ge rmany by employers established abroad  
(1) The working conditions as referred to in sections 2, 5 and 13b of this Act and as referred 
to in section 20 of the Minimum Wage Act apply to those drivers who are employed by 
employers established abroad to provide  transport services for goods or passengers in 
Germany in the framework of a posting as referred to in Article 1  (3) (a) of Directive 
96/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 1996 concerning 
the posting of workers in the framew ork of the provision of services (OJ L 18, 21.1.1997, p.  
1), as last amended by Directive (EU) 2018/957 (OJ L 173, 9.7.2018, p. 16; OJ L 91, 
29.3.2019, p. 77). Drivers are considered to be employed in Germany within the meaning of 
sentence 1 in particular where they  
1. on the basis of a transport contract perform national transport operations in 
relation to goods or passengers in accordance with Regulation (EC) No  1072/2009 or 
Regulation (EC) No  1073/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 
October 2009 on common rules for access to the international market for coach and bus 
services, and amending Regulation (EC) No 561/2006  (OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 88),  as 
last amended by  Regulation (EU) No 517/2013 (OJ L 158 , 10.6.2013, p. 1),  (cabotage) o r 
2. on the basis of a transport contract perform a transport operation in relation to 
goods or to passengers from a State other than the employer’s State of establishment 
across a border to a State other than the employer’ s State of establishment (trilate ral 
operations) and either the departure point or destination is located in Germany.  
(2) Sections 37 to 40 do not apply where the employer is established in a third country. 
Employers established in a State which has entered into an international agreement  with 
effect for the Federal Republic of Germany providing for the application of posting rules to 
the road transport sector are treated in accordance with those rules provided for in the 
international agreement.  
Section 37  
Bilateral transport operations i n relation to goods  
(1) Drivers are not considered to be employed in Germany within the meaning of section 36  
(1) where they exclusively perform bilateral transport operations in relation to goods.  
(2) A bilateral transport operation in relation to goods i s the transport of goods on the basis 
of a transport contract  
1. from the Member State where the employer is established  to another Member 
State of the European Union or the European Economic Area or to a third country or  
2. from another Member State of th e European Union or the European Economic 
Area or from a  third country to the Member State where the employer is established . 
(3) Drivers are not considered to be employed in Germany, in derogation from section 36  (1) 
sentence 2 no. 2, when performing the first trilateral transport operation in relation to goods Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 26 of 27 within the framework of a bilateral transport operation as referred to in subsection (2). In 
derogation from sentence 1, drivers are also not considered to be employed in Germany 
when performing the  second trilateral transport operation in relation to goods within the 
framework of a bilateral transport operation where this bilateral transport operation  
1. is an operation which ends  in the Member State of establishment and  
2. follows, without the perf ormance of any transport operations  in the intervening 
period,  a bilateral transport operation which started in the Member State of establishment 
and during which no trilateral transport operation was performed.  
(4) From the date on which smart tachographs  are required to be fitted in the vehicles 
registered in a Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area for the 
first time, as provided for in the fourth subparagraph of Article 8  (1) of Regulation (EU) No 
165/2014, the exemptions set o ut in subsection (3) apply solely to drivers using motor 
vehicles fitted with smart tachographs as provided for in Articles 8 to 10 of Regulation (EU) 
No 165/2014.  
Section 38  
Bilateral transport operations in relation to passengers  
(1) Drivers a re not considered to be employed in Germany within the meaning of section 36  
(1) where they perform exclusively bilateral transport operations in relation to passengers.  
(2) A bilateral transport operation in relation to passengers is a transport operation  in which 
the driver  
1. picks up passengers in the Member  State where the employer is e stablish ed 
and sets them down in another Member State of the European Union or the European 
Economic Area or a third country,  
2. picks up passengers in a nother  Member St ate of the European Union or the 
European Economic Area or a third country and sets them down in the Member State 
where the employer is established  or 
3. picks up and sets down passengers in the Member State where the employer is 
established for the purpos e of carrying out local excursions in another Member State of 
the European Union or the European Economic Area or a third country.  
(3) In derogation from section 36  (1) sentence 2 no. 2, drivers are not considered to be 
employed in Germany when  
1. performi ng the first trilateral transport operation in the framework of a bilateral 
transport operation as referred to in subsection (2) and  
2. they do not offer passenger transport services between two locations within the 
Member State crossed.  
(4) From the date on which smart tachographs are required to be fitted in the vehicles 
registered in a Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area for the 
first time, as provided for in the fourth subparagraph of Article 8  (1) of Regulation (EU) No 
165/2014, the exemptions set out in subsection (3) apply solely to drivers using motor 
vehicles fitted with smart tachographs as provided for in Articles 8 to 10 of Regulation (EU) 
No 165/2014.  
Section 39  
Combined transport operations  
Drivers are not considere d to be employed in Germany within the meaning of section 36  (1) 
when performing the initial or final road leg of a combined transport operation as defined in 
Council Directive 92/106/EEC of 7 December 1992 on the establishment of common rules 
for certain types of combined transport of goods between Member States (OJ L 368, 
17.12.1992, p. 38), as last amended by Directive 2013/22/EU (OJ L 158, 10.6.2013, p. 356), Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 27 of 27 if on the road leg exclusively bilateral transport operations and additional transport 
operatio ns in relation to goods as referred to in section 37 are performed.  
Section 40  
Transit  
Drivers employed by an employer established in another Member State of the European 
Union or the European Economic Area are not considered to be employed in Germany with in 
the meaning of section 36  (1) where they transit through Germany without loading or 
unloading freight and without picking up or setting down passengers (transit).  
Subdivision 3  
Transitional provisions  
Section  41 
Transitional provisions concerning long -term posting  
(1) The working conditions provided for under section  13b (1) apply as of 30  July 2020 at the 
earliest.  
(2) Periods of employment in Germany before 30  July 2020 are included when calculating 
the period of employment in accordance with section  13b (1). If the employment in Germany 
began before 30  July 2020, notification as referred to in  section  13b (2) is deemed to have 
been made.  
Section  42 
Transitional provisions concerning  the building industry  
Any declaration of general applicability of a co llective agreement in the building industry  in 
accordance with section  4 (1) no.  1 and section  6 (2) which was made before 30  July 2020 is 
equal, as regards the application of sections  8 and 9 and Division  5, to a statutory instrument 
as referred to in sec tion 7 insofar as that collective agreement lays down working conditions 
as referred to  in section  5 sentence  1 no.  1. Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 1 of 141 Übersetzung durch den Sprachendienst des Bundesministerium der Finanzen . 
Translation provided by the Language Service of the Federal Ministry of Finance.  
Stand: Die Übersetzung berücksichtigt die Änderung( en) des Gesetzes durch Artikel 1 7 des Gesetzes  
vom 17. Juli 2017  (BGBl. I S. 2541 ) 
Version information: The translation includes the amen dment(s) to the Act by Article 1 7 of the Act of 17 
July 2017  (Federal Law Gazette I p. 2541 ) 
 
Zur Nutzung dieser Übersetzung lesen Sie bitte den Hinweis auf www.gesetze -im-internet.de unter  
"Translations" . 
 
For conditions governing use of this translation, please see the information provided at www.gesetze -im-
internet.de under  "Translations" . 
 
 
The Fiscal Code of Germany  
Fiscal Code of Germany in the version promulgated on 1 October 2002 (Federal Law Gazette 
[Bundesgesetzblatt] I p. 3866; 2003 I p . 61), last amended by  Article 17  of the Act of 17 July 2017 
(Federal Law Gazette I p. 2541)  
First Part  
Introductory regulations  
First Chapter  
Scope of application  
Section 1  
Scope  
(1) This Code shall apply to all taxes, including the tax rebates governed by German federal law o r the 
law of the European Union insofar as these are administered by the revenue authorities of the 
Federation or of the Länder . It may only be applied subject to the law of the European Union.  
(2) The following provisions of this Code shall apply accordin gly to non -personal taxes to the extent that 
their administration has been assigned to the municipalities:  
1. the provisions of the First, Second, Fourth, Sixth and Seventh Chapters of the First Part 
(Scope of application; Tax definitions; Data processing and tax secrecy; Rights of data subjects; Data 
protection supervision, judicial protection in matters of data protection law),  
2. the provisions of the Second Part (Legal provisions on tax liability),  
3. the provisions of the Third Part except sections 82 to 84 (General rules of procedure),  
4. the provisions of the Fourth Part (Executing the taxation procedure),  
5. the provisions of the Fifth Part (Levy procedure),  
6. sections 351, 361(1), second sentence, and 361(3),  
7. the provisions of the Eighth Part (P rovisions on criminal penalties and administrative fines, 
criminal and administrative fine proceedings).  
(3) Subject to the law of the European Communities, the provisions of this Code shall apply mutatis 
mutandis  to ancillary tax payments. However, the th ird to sixth chapters of the Fourth Part shall only 
apply to the extent that this is specifically provided for.  
Section 2  
Primacy of international agreements  
(1) Agreements on taxation concluded with other countries within the meaning of Article 59(2), fir st 
sentence of the Basic Law, shall take precedence over tax legislation insofar as they have become 
directly applicable domestic law.  
(2) To ensure the equality of tax treatment and to avoid double taxation or double non -taxation, the 
Federal Ministry of Finance shall be authorised with the consent of the Bundesrat to issue ordinances on 
the implementation of arrangements reached by way of consultation. Arrangements reached by way of 
consultation under the first sentence above shall mean mutual agreements between the competent 
authorities of the contracting states to a double taxation agreement with the aim of determining the 
details of the implementation of such an agreement, and especially to resolve difficulties or doubts as to 
the interpretation or appl ication of the respective agreement.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 2 of 141 (3) The Federal Government shall be authorised to adopt, by way of ordinances issued with the consent 
of the Bundesrat, rules that:  
1. specify income or assets or parts thereof for which the Federal Republic of Germany will 
allow a tax credit based on the application of a provision contained in an agreement for the avoidance 
of double taxation and notified via diplomatic channels, and  
2. include within the scope of public service -related provisions contained in an agreem ent for 
the avoidance of double taxation those entities and institutions that are specified by competent 
authorities in an arrangement permitted under that agreement.  
Section 2a  
Scope of provisions on the processing of personal data  
(1) The provisions in t his Code and in other tax legislation that pertain to the processing of personal data 
within the scope of this Code shall apply to the processing of personal data by revenue authorities 
(section 6(2)), other public entities (section 6(1a) to (1c)) and non -public entities (section 6(1d) and (1e)). 
The Federal Data Protection Act, other federal data protection provisions and relevant Land  legislation 
shall apply to revenue authorities only to the extent that this Code or other tax legislation provides 
stipula tions to this effect.  
(2) Data protection rules contained in this Code shall also apply to data that revenue authorities process 
as part of their functions in supervising the cross -border movement of goods. Such data shall be deemed 
data that have been pro cessed within the context of a tax procedure.  
(3) The provisions in this Code and in other tax legislation that pertain to the processing of personal data 
shall not apply to the extent that European Union law, in particular the applicable version of “Regul ation 
(EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of 
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, 
and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Pro tection Regulation)” (OJ L 119, 4.5.2016, p. 1; OJ L 
314, 22.11.2016, p. 72), applies directly or in accordance with subsection (5) below.  
(4) Unless otherwise required by law, the provisions contained in the First and Third Parts of the Federal 
Data Prote ction Act shall apply to the processing of personal data for the purpose of preventing, 
investigating, detecting, prosecuting or punishing a tax crime or tax -related administrative offence.  
(5) Unless otherwise required by law, the provisions in Regulation  (EU) 2016/679, this Code and other 
tax legislation that pertain to the processing of natural persons’ personal data shall apply accordingly to 
information relating to identified or identifiable  
1.  deceased natural persons and  
2.  corporations, associatio ns with or without legal capacity, and pools of assets.  
Second Chapter  
Tax definitions  
Section 3  
Taxes, ancillary tax payments  
(1) “Taxes” shall mean payments of money, other than payments made in consideration of the 
performance of a particular activity, which are collected by a public body for the purpose of raising 
revenue and imposed by the body on all persons to whom the characteristics on which the law bases 
liability for payment apply; the raising of revenue may be a seconda ry objective.  
(2) “Non -personal taxes” shall mean real property tax and trade tax.  
(3) Import and export duties pursuant to Article 5 numbers 20 and 21 of the Union Customs Code shall 
be taxes within the meaning of this Code. The Union Customs Code is Regulation (EU) 952/2013 of th e 
European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code (OJ L 
269, 10.10.2013, p. 1, OJ L 287, p. 90), as amended.  
(4) “Ancillary tax payments” shall mean  
1.  fees for delay pursuant to section 146(2b),  
2.  late-filing penalties pursuant to section 152,  
3.  penalties pursuant to section 162(4),  
4.  interest pursuant to sections 233 to 237 as well as interest in accordance with tax legislation 
to which sections 238 and 239 apply,  
5.  late-payment penalties pursuant to se ction 240,  
6.  coercive fines pursuant to section 329,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 3 of 141 7.  costs pursuant to sections 89, 178, 178a and sections 337 to 345,  
8.  interest on import and export duties pursuant to Article 5 numbers 20 and 21 of the Union 
Customs Code and  
9.  late-filing fees  pursuant to section 22a(5) of the Income Tax Act.  
(5) Revenue from interest on import and export duties pursuant to Article 5 numbers 20 and 21 of the 
Union Customs Code shall accrue to the Federation. Revenue from all other interest shall accrue to the 
political subdivision authorised to levy the corresponding tax. Revenue from costs described in section 
89 shall accrue to the political subdivision whose revenue authority is responsible for issuing the 
advance ruling. One half of the revenue from costs de scribed in section 178a shall accrue to the 
Federation, the other half to the administering political subdivisions. All other ancillary tax payments shall 
accrue to the administering political subdivisions.  
Section 4  
Law 
“Law” shall mean every legal norm.  
Section 5  
Discretion  
Where the revenue authority is authorised to use its discretion it shall do so in compliance with the 
purpose of the authorisation and shall respect the statutory restrictions on such discretion.  
Section 6 
Authorities, public and non -public entities, revenue authorities  
(1) “Authority” shall mean any public entity performing public administration functions.  
(1a) “Federal public entities” shall mean the authorities, the bodies responsible for the administration of 
justice, and the other public institutions of the Federation, of the federal corporations, of public agencies 
and foundations, and of the associations thereof, irrespective of their legal form.  
(1b) “ Land  public entities” shall mean the authorities, the bodies responsible for th e administration of 
justice, and the other public institutions of a Land , of a municipality, of an association of municipalities, of 
any other public law entity subject to the supervision of a Land , and of the associations thereof, 
irrespective of their le gal form.  
(1c) Associations under private law that belong to federal or Land  public entities and that perform public 
administration functions shall be deemed federal public entities, irrespective of the involvement of non -
public entities, if  
1.  their acti vities extend beyond a single Land  or 
2.  the Federation holds the absolute majority of shares or is entitled to the absolute majority of 
votes.  
Otherwise they shall be deemed Land  public entities.  
(1d) “Non -public entities” shall mean natural and legal pe rsons, companies and other associations under 
private law that are not covered by subsections (1a) to (1c). If a non -public entity performs official 
functions of public administration, it shall to that extent be a public entity as defined by this Code.  
(1e) Federal or Land  public entities shall be deemed non -public entities within the meaning of this Code 
to the extent that they participate in competition as public enterprises.  
(2) For the purposes of this Code, “revenue authorities” shall mean the followin g federal revenue 
authorities and Land  revenue authorities referred to in the Fiscal Administration Act:  
1. as highest authorities, the Federal Ministry of Finance and the highest Land  authorities 
responsible for revenue administration,  
2. as higher federa l authorities, the Federal Central Tax Office and  the Central Customs 
Authority,  
3. as higher Land  authorities, data processing centres as well as Land  revenue authorities that 
have been given jurisdiction, throughout a given Land , over cash transactions a nd collection 
procedures, including enforcement, on the basis of an ordinance pursuant to section 17(2), third 
sentence, number 3 of the Fiscal Administration Act,  
4. as intermediate authorities, regional finance offices,  
4a. Land  revenue authorities esta blished in lieu of a regional finance office in accordance with 
the Fiscal Administration Act or Land  legislation,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 4 of 141 5. as local authorities, the main customs offices including their agencies, the customs 
investigation offices, the tax offices and the specia l revenue authorities of the Länder , 
6. child benefit disbursement offices,  
7. the central agency within the meaning of section 81 of the Income Tax Act, and  
8.  the German pension insurance system for miners, railway workers and maritime workers 
(section  40a(6) of the Income Tax Act).  
Section 7  
Public officials  
“Public official” shall mean any person who, under German law,  
1. is a civil servant or judge (section 11(1) number 3 of the Criminal Code),  
2. holds any other office under public law, or  
3. has ot herwise been assigned to exercise public administration functions at an authority or 
other public entity, or on their behalf.  
Section 8  
Residence  
Persons shall be resident at the place at which they maintain a dwelling under circumstances from which 
it may  be inferred that they will maintain and use such dwelling.  
Section 9  
Habitual abode  
Persons shall have their habitual abode at the place at which they are present under circumstances 
indicating that their stay at that place or in that area is not merely t emporary. An unbroken stay of not 
less than six months’ duration shall be invariably and from the beginning of such stay regarded as an 
habitual abode in the territory of application of this Code; brief interruptions shall be excepted. The 
second sentence shall not apply where the stay is undertaken exclusively for visiting, recuperation, 
curative or similar private purposes and does not last more than one year.  
Section 10  
Business management  
“Business management” shall mean the centre of commercial executi ve management.  
Section 11  
Registered office  
Corporations, associations or pools of assets shall have their registered office at the place which is 
determined by law, articles of partnership, statutes, acts of foundation or similar provisions.  
Section 12  
Permanent establishment  
“Permanent establishment” shall mean any fixed place of business or facility serving the business of an 
enterprise. In particular, the following shall be considered permanent establishments:  
1. the place of business management,  
2. branches,  
3. offices,  
4. factories or workshops,  
5. warehouses,  
6. purchasing offices or sales outlets,  
7. mines, quarries or other stationary, moving or floating facilities for the exploitation of natural 
resources,  
8. building sites or constructions or inst allation projects, including those moving or floating, 
where  
a) an individual building site or construction or installation project, or  
b) one of several coexistent building sites or constructions or installation projects, or  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 5 of 141 c) a number of immediately suc cessive building sites or constructions or installation 
projects  
last(s) more than six months.  
Section 13  
Permanent representative  
“Permanent representative” shall mean any person who conducts the business of an enterprise in a 
sustained manner and, in so doing, is subject to its instructions. In particular, “permanent representative” 
shall mean any person who, in a sustained manner, on behalf of an enterprise,  
1. concludes or brokers contracts or solicits orders, or  
2. maintains a stock of goods or merchan dise and makes deliveries from this stock.  
Section 14  
Economic activity  
“Economic activity” shall mean an independent sustainable activity from which revenue or other 
economic benefits are derived and which comprises more than mere asset management. The in tention 
to realise a profit shall not be required. As a rule, an activity shall be deemed to constitute asset 
management where assets are utilised, e.g., by investing capital assets to earn interest or by renting or 
leasing immovable property.  
Section 15  
Relatives  
(1) “Relatives” shall mean:  
1. fiancé(e)s, including within the meaning of the Civil Partnership Act,  
2. spouses or civil partners,  
3. relations by blood or by marriage in direct line,  
4. siblings,  
5. children of siblings,  
6. spouses of siblings, and siblings of spouses,  
7. siblings of the parents,  
8. persons who are related to each other like parents and children through a permanent foster 
relationship involving a common household (foster parents and foster children).  
(2) The persons referred to i n subsection (1) above shall also be relatives where,  
1. in the case of numbers 2, 3 and 6, the marriage or civil partnership establishing the 
relationship no longer exists;  
2. in the case of numbers 3 to 7, the relationship by blood or by marriage has bee n terminated 
due to adoption as a child,  
3. in the case of number 8, the common household no longer exists, provided that the persons 
continue to be related to each other like parents and children.  
Third Chapter  
Competence of the revenue authorities  
Sectio n 16 
Subject -matter jurisdiction  
Unless otherwise stipulated, the subject -matter jurisdiction of the revenue authorities shall be determined 
pursuant to the Fiscal Administration Act.  
Section 17  
Local jurisdiction  
Unless otherwise stipulated, local jurisdi ction shall be determined by the following provisions.  
Section 18  
Separate determination  
(1) The following shall have local jurisdiction with regard to separate determination pursuant to section 
180: Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 6 of 141 1. in the case of agricultural and forestry undertakings , real property, business premises and 
mineral exploitation rights, the tax office in whose district the undertaking, real property, business 
premises or mineral exploitation right is located or, if the undertaking, real property, business 
premises or mine ral exploitation right extends over the districts of several tax offices, the tax office in 
whose district the most valuable part is located (tax office of location),  
2. in the case of commercial undertakings whose business management is located within the  
territory of application of this Code, the tax office in whose district the business management is 
located, in the case of commercial undertakings whose business management is not located within 
the territory of application of this Code, the tax office in  whose district a permanent establishment – in 
the case of several permanent establishments, the economically most important one – is maintained 
(tax office of the undertaking),  
3. in the case of income from independent personal services, the tax office fr om whose district 
the activity is predominantly performed,  
4. in cases where income, other than income from agriculture and forestry, business or self -
employment, is distributed among multiple persons and is determined separately in accordance with 
section  180(1), first sentence, number 2a,   
a) the tax office in whose district this income is managed, or,  
b) if it is not possible to determine where this income is managed within this Code’s territory 
of application, the tax office in whose district the most v aluable part of the assets yielding the 
joint income is located.  
This shall apply accordingly in cases of separate determination pursuant to section 180(1), first 
sentence, number 3 or section 180(2).  
(2) Where separate determination is to be conducted wit h regard to several taxpayers and local 
jurisdiction cannot be determined pursuant to subsection (1) above, every tax office which, pursuant to 
sections 19 or 20, is responsible for taxes on income and on capital of a taxpayer to whom a share of the 
object  of determination is attributable shall have local jurisdiction. Where because of an ordinance 
pursuant to section 17(2), third and fourth sentence, of the Fiscal Administration Act this tax office does 
not have subject -matter jurisdiction with regard to s eparate determination, the tax office with subject -
matter jurisdiction shall take its place.  
Section 19  
Taxes on the income and capital of natural persons  
(1) The tax office in whose district a natural person is resident or, in the absence of a residence, has his 
habitual abode shall have local jurisdiction over the taxation of that person’s income and capital (tax 
office of residence). In the case of multiple residences within the territory of application of this Code, the 
residence at which the taxpayer i s predominantly present shall be decisive; in the case of multiple 
residences of a taxpayer who is married or in a civil partnership and is not permanently separated from 
his spouse or civil partner, the residence at which the family is predominantly prese nt shall be decisive. 
With regard to persons subject to unlimited tax liability pursuant to section 1(2) of the Income Tax Act 
and section 1(2) of the Capital Tax Act, local jurisdiction shall lie with the tax office in whose district the 
paying public fun d is located; the same shall apply in the cases referred to in section 1(3) of the Income 
Tax Act with regard to persons fulfilling the requirements of section 1(2), first sentence, numbers 1 and 2 
of the Income Tax Act, as well as in the cases referred to  in section 1a(2) of the Income Tax Act.  
(2) Where the requirements referred to in subsection (1) above are not fulfilled, local jurisdiction shall lie 
with the tax office in whose district the assets of the taxpayer are located, and where this applies to 
several tax offices, the tax office in whose district the most valuable part of the assets is located. Where 
the taxpayer does not have any assets within the territory of application of this Code, the tax office in 
whose district the activity is or has bee n predominantly performed or exploited within the territory of 
application of this Code shall have local jurisdiction.  
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) above, where there are several tax offices in the 
municipality of residence and wher e a taxpayer with income from agriculture and forestry, business or 
self-employment performs this activity within the municipality of residence but in the district of a tax office 
other than the tax office of residence, the first tax office shall be respon sible where it would have been 
competent for the separate determination of this income pursuant to section 18(1) numbers 1, 2 or 3. In 
applying the first sentence of this subsection, income from profit shares shall be taken into account only 
where it is th e sole income of the taxpayer within the meaning of the first sentence.  
(4) In applying subsection (3) above, taxpayers who must be or may be assessed jointly shall be treated 
as if their income were derived by a single taxpayer.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 7 of 141 (5) The governments of the  Länder  may stipulate by way of ordinance that an area comprising several 
municipalities shall be considered a municipality of residence within the meaning of subsection (3) above 
insofar as this seems appropriate considering the economic situation, transp ort infrastructure, the 
structure of administrative authorities or other local needs. The government of a Land  may delegate 
these powers to the highest authority of this Land  responsible for revenue administration.  
(6) In order to guarantee the taxation of  persons who are subject to limited tax liability under section 1(4) 
of the Income Tax Act and who receive income as defined in section 49(1) numbers 7 and 10 of the 
Income Tax Act, the Federal Ministry of Finance may issue ordinances with the consent of t he Bundesrat 
that assign, to one revenue authority, local jurisdiction for this Code’s territory of application. The first 
sentence above shall also apply where an application pursuant to section 1(3) of the Income Tax Act is 
submitted.  
Section 20  
Taxes on  the income and capital of corporations, associations and pools of assets  
(1) Local jurisdiction over the taxation of the income and capital of corporations, associations and pools 
of assets shall lie with the tax office in whose district the business mana gement is located.  
(2) Where the business management is not located within the territory of application of this Code or 
where the place of business management cannot be determined, the tax office in whose district the 
taxpayer has its registered office sha ll have local jurisdiction.  
(3) Where neither the business management nor the registered office is located within the territory of 
application of this Code, local jurisdiction shall lie with the tax office in whose district assets of the 
taxpayer are locat ed and, if this applies to several tax offices, the tax office in whose district the most 
valuable part of the assets is located.  
(4) Where neither the business management nor the registered office or assets of the taxpayer are 
located within the territory  of application of this Code, the tax office in whose district the activity is or has 
been predominantly performed or exploited within the territory of application of this Code shall have local 
jurisdiction.  
Section 20a  
Taxes on income in the case of const ruction services  
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 19 and 20, jurisdiction with regard to the taxation of 
enterprises providing construction services within the meaning of section 48(1), third sentence, of the 
Income Tax Act shall lie with the  tax office responsible for the taxation of the corresponding turnover 
pursuant to section 21(1) if the trader’s residence or the enterprise’s business management or registered 
office is not located within the territory of application of this Code. Notwith standing sections 38 to 42f of 
the Income Tax Act, this shall also apply to the withholding of taxes on wages.  
(2) Where foreign suppliers under section 38(1), first sentence, number 2 of the Income Tax Act provide 
workers for temporary employment, the tax  office responsible for the taxation of the corresponding 
turnover pursuant to section 21(1) shall be responsible for administering wages tax. The first sentence 
shall apply only in cases where the person hired out is employed in the construction industry.  
(3) As regards the taxation of persons employed in Germany by enterprises referred to in subsections (1) 
and (2) above, the Federal Ministry of Finance may, in derogation of section 19, issue ordinances with 
the consent of the Bundesrat that assign local jurisdiction for this Code’s territory of application to one 
tax office.  
Section 21  
Valued -added tax  
(1) The tax office in whose district the trader wholly or mainly operates his enterprise in the territory of 
application of this Code shall have jurisdicti on over VAT, excluding import VAT. As regards traders 
whose residence, registered office or place of management is not located within the territory of 
application of this Code, the Federal Ministry of Finance may, in order to ensure taxation, issue 
ordinan ces with the consent of the Bundesrat that assign local jurisdiction for the this Code’s territory of 
application to one revenue authority.  
(2) For persons who are not traders, jurisdiction over VAT shall lie with the tax office responsible for the 
taxatio n of income in accordance with sections 19 or 20; in cases where section 180(1), first sentence, 
number 2a applies, jurisdiction over VAT shall lie with the tax office responsible for separate 
determination in accordance with section 18.  
Section 22  
Non-personal taxes  
(1) Local jurisdiction over the assessment and apportionment of base amounts of non -personal taxes1 
shall lie with the tax office of location (section 18(1) number 1) in the case of real property tax, and with 
the tax office of the undertaking (section 18(1) number 2) in the case of trade tax. Notwithstanding the 
provisions of the first sentence of this subsection, jurisdiction over the assessment and apportionment of Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 8 of 141 base amounts of trade tax in the case of enterprises providing construction se rvices within the meaning 
of section 48(1), third sentence, of the Income Tax Act shall lie with the tax office responsible for the 
taxation of the corresponding turnover pursuant to section 21(1), provided that the trader’s residence or 
the enterprise’s b usiness management or registered office is located outside the territory of application of 
this Code.  
(2) Where the tax offices are responsible for assessing, levying and recovering non -personal taxes, local 
jurisdiction shall lie with the tax office to wh ose district the municipality authorised to apply the municipal 
multiplier belongs. Where a municipality authorised to apply the municipal multiplier belongs to the 
districts of several tax offices, local jurisdiction shall lie with the tax office which is  or would be 
responsible pursuant to subsection (1) above if only the parts of the enterprise, real property or business 
premises located in the municipality authorised to apply the municipal multiplier were present in the 
territory of application of this Code.  
(3) Subsection (2) above shall apply mutatis mutandis  where a Land  is entitled to the tax revenue from 
non-personal taxes pursuant to Article 106(6), third sentence, of the Basic Law.  
Footnote 1: Steuermessbetrag , calculated by applying multiplier ( Steuermesszahl ) to value of object to 
be taxed (property -Grundsteuer ; earnings -Gewerbesteuer ). The base amount of non -personal tax is then 
multiplied by the municipal multi plier ( Hebesatz ) to give the  Grundsteuer  or Gewerbesteuer  
Section 22a  
Jurisdiction on  the continental shelf and in the exclusive economic zone  
In those parts of the continental shelf and the exclusive economic zone belonging to the Federal 
Republic of Germany, the jurisdiction of Land  revenue authorities in accordance with sections 18 to 2 2 or 
in accordance with tax legislation shall be based on the equidistance principle.  
Section 23  
Import and export duties, excise duties  
(1) Local jurisdiction over import and export duties pursuant to Article 5 numbers 20 and 21 of the Union 
Customs Code and over excise duties shall lie with the main customs office in whose district the matter 
to which the respective law attaches the duty occurs.  
(2) Local jurisdiction shall further lie with the main customs office from whose district the taxpayer 
operates  his enterprise. Where the enterprise is operated from a location outside the territory of 
application of this Code, jurisdiction shall lie with the main customs office in whose district the trader 
wholly or mainly conducts his transactions in the territor y of application of this Code.  
(3) Where import and export duties pursuant to Article 5 numbers 20 and 21 of the Union Customs Code 
and excise duties are due in connection with a tax crime or tax -related administrative offence, local 
jurisdiction shall lie  with the main customs office that has jurisdiction over the crime or offence.  
Section 24  
Surrogate competence  
Where local jurisdiction cannot be derived from other provisions, the revenue authority in whose district 
the matter requiring the official act a rises shall be responsible.  
Section 25  
Multiple local jurisdiction  
Where several revenue authorities have jurisdiction, the revenue authority which was first charged with 
the matter shall decide unless the revenue authorities responsible agree on another r evenue authority 
responsible or the common supervisory authority responsible determines that another revenue authority 
with local jurisdiction should decide. In the absence of a common supervisory authority, the supervisory 
authorities responsible shall re ach a joint decision.  
Section 26  
Transfer of jurisdiction  
Where local jurisdiction is transferred from one revenue authority to another due to a change in the 
circumstances establishing such jurisdiction, the transfer of jurisdiction shall occur as soon as  one of the 
two revenue authorities becomes aware of this. The hitherto responsible revenue authority may continue 
with administrative proceedings where this serves to ensure that the proceedings are carried out simply 
and appropriately while protecting th e interests of the participants, and provided that the newly 
responsible revenue authority agrees. There shall be no transfer of jurisdiction pursuant to the first 
sentence above as long as  
1.  a decision has not yet been taken on an insolvency petition,  
2.  open insolvency proceedings have not yet been cancelled, or  
3.  a partnership or a legal person is undergoing liquidation.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 9 of 141 Section 27  
Agreed jurisdiction  
In mutual agreement with the revenue authority which has local jurisdiction pursuant to the provisi ons of 
the tax laws, a different revenue authority may assume responsibility for taxation, provided that the 
person concerned agrees. One of the revenue authorities referred to in the first sentence of this section 
may ask the person concerned to declare h is approval within a reasonable period of time. Approval shall 
be deemed to have been given if the person concerned does not object within this period of time. The 
person concerned shall be explicitly advised of the consequences of remaining silent.  
Sectio n 28 
Disputed jurisdiction  
(1) Where several revenue authorities consider themselves to have jurisdiction or not to have jurisdiction, 
or where jurisdiction is doubtful for other reasons, the common supervisory authority responsible shall 
decide on local j urisdiction. Section 25, second sentence, shall apply accordingly.  
(2) Section 5(1) number 7 of the Fiscal Administration Act shall remain unaffected.  
Section 29  
Imminent danger  
In the case of imminent danger, local jurisdiction for non -deferrable measures  shall lie with any revenue 
authority in whose district the matter requiring the official act arises. The authority otherwise locally 
responsible shall be informed without undue delay.  
Section 29a  
Assistance for tax offices with local jurisdiction as order ed by superior revenue authorities  
To ensure the timely and consistent execution of tax laws, the highest revenue authority of a Land , or the 
Land  revenue authority it authorises, may direct that a tax office with local jurisdiction receive full or 
partial  assistance from another tax office in fulfilling the tasks involved the taxation procedure. The 
assisting tax office shall act on behalf of the tax office with local jurisdiction; the administrative actions 
taken by the assisting tax office shall be ascri bed to the tax office with local jurisdiction.  
Section 29b  
The processing of personal data by revenue authorities  
(1) Revenue authorities shall be permitted to process personal data if such processing is necessary for 
them to fulfil the functions incumbent  upon them or to exercise the official authority with which they have 
been vested.  
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, revenue authorities shall 
be permitted to process special categories of personal data as desc ribed in Article 9(1) of Regulation 
(EU) 2016/679 to the extent that such processing is necessary for reasons of substantial public interest 
and to the extent that the interests of the controller in processing the data override the interests of the 
data su bject. In such cases, revenue authorities shall provide for suitable and specific measures to 
safeguard the data subject’s interests; the second sentence of section 22(2) of the Federal Data 
Protection Act shall apply accordingly.  
Section 29c  
The processin g of personal data for other purposes by revenue authorities  
(1) In the course of performing their functions, revenue authorities shall be permitted to process personal 
data for a purpose other than that for which a revenue authority collected or recorded such data (further 
processing) if  
1.  such further processing serves to facilitate an administrative procedure, an auditing 
procedure, judicial proceedings in tax matters, criminal proceedings for a tax crime, or administrative 
fine proceedings for a tax -related administrative offence,  
2.  the legal conditions have been met that would permit the disclosure of such data in 
accordance with section 30(4) or (5) or if it is necessary to check whether such conditions have been 
met, 
3.  it is evident that such fu rther processing is in the interest of the data subject and there is no 
reason to assume that the data subject would withhold his consent if he were aware of the other 
purpose,  
4. such further processing is necessary for developing, reviewing or modifying the automated 
procedures of revenue authorities because  
a) unaltered data are needed or  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 10 of 141 b) the anonymisation or pseudonymisation of such data is impossible or would require 
disproportionate effort.  
In this connection, the use of personal data is necessary in particular if personal data from a number 
of different filing systems need to be unambiguously linked, and it is impossible or would require 
disproportionate effort  to create suitable test cases.  
5.  such further processing is necessary for conducting r egulatory impact assessments 
because  
a) unaltered data are needed or  
b) the anonymisation or pseudonymisation of such data is impossible or would require 
disproportionate effort,  
or 
6.  such further processing is necessary for the exercise of supervisory, regulatory and 
disciplinary powers by revenue authorities. This shall also apply to the alteration or use of personal 
data by revenue authorities for purposes of training or testing, as long as the data subject has no 
overriding interests that  merit protec tion. 
In cases where number 4 of the first sentence above applies, the data may be processed only for the 
purpose of developing, reviewing or modifying automated procedures and must be deleted within one 
year after these measures have ended. In cases where  number 6 of the first sentence above applies, the 
data may be processed only by persons who are required to observe tax secrecy in accordance with 
section 30.  
(2) The further processing of special categories of personal data as described in Article 9(1) o f 
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 shall be permissible if the conditions stipulated in subsection (1) above have 
been met and an exception under Article 9(2) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or under section 29b(2) 
applies.  
Fourth Chapter  
Tax secrecy  
Section 30  
Tax se crecy  
(1) Public officials shall be obliged to observe tax secrecy.  
(2) Public officials shall be in breach of tax secrecy if they  
1.  disclose or make use of, without authorisation, a third person’s personal data that they have  
gained access to  
a) in the course of an administrative procedure, an auditing procedure or judicial 
proceedings in tax matters,  
b) in the course of criminal proceedings for tax crimes or administrative fine proceedings for 
tax-related administrative offences,  
c) for other reasons, based on a notification from a revenue authority or based on the 
legally required submission of a tax assessment notice or of a certification of findings made 
during the taxation process  
or 
2.  disclose or make use of, without authorisation, a corporate or  commercial secret that has 
become known to them in the course of procedures/proceedings specified under number 1 above,  
(the data under numbers 1 and 2 above are hereinafter referred to as “protected data”) or  
3.  electronically retrieve, without authoris ation, protected data that have been stored in an 
automated filing system for procedures/proceedings specified under number 1 above.  
(3) The following shall be deemed to be of equivalent status to public officials:  
1. persons under special obligations to t he civil service (section 11(1) number 4 of the Criminal 
Code),  
1a. the persons designated in section 193(2) of the Act on the Constitution of Courts,  
2. officially consulted experts,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 11 of 141 3. holders of offices of the churches and other religious communities be ing public -law entities.  
(4) The disclosure or use of protected data shall be permissible insofar as  
1. such disclosure or use facilitates procedures/proceedings within the meaning of subsection 
(2) number 1(a) and (b) above,  
1a.  such disclosure or use fa cilitates processing by revenue authorities in accordance with 
section  29c(1), first sentence, number 4 or 6,  
1b. such disclosure or use facilitates administrative fine proceedings in accordance with Article 
83 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 within the scope of this Code,2.  such disclosure or use is 
expressly permitted by federal law,  
2a.  such disclosure or use is prescribed or permitted by European Union law,  
2b.  such disclosure or use helps the Federal Statistical Office perform its statutory functions,  
2c.  such disclosure or use facilitates regulatory impact assessments, and the conditions for 
further processing under section 29c(1), first sentence, number 5 have been met,  
3. the persons concerned give their consent,  
4. such disclosure or use facilitates criminal proceedings for a crime other than a tax crime,  
and such information  
a) was obtained in the course of proceedings for tax crimes or tax -related administrative 
offences; however, this shall not apply in relation to facts which a taxpayer has disclo sed 
while unaware that criminal proceedings or administrative fine proceedings have commenced 
or which have already become known in the course of the taxation procedure before the 
commencement of such proceedings, or  
b) was obtained in the absence of any t ax liability or by waiver of a right to withhold 
information,  
5. there is a compelling public interest in such disclosure or use; such compelling public 
interest  shall be deemed to exist in particular if  
a) such disclosure is necessary to prevent significa nt harm to the public interest, to avert 
threats to public security, defence or national security, or to prevent or prosecute crimes or 
deliberate serious offences that aim to cause human injury or loss of life or that aim to cause 
damage to the state and its institutions,  
b) economic crimes are being or are to be prosecuted, and which in view of the method of 
their perpetration or the extent of the damage caused by them are likely to substantially 
disrupt the economic order or to substantially undermine ge neral confidence in the integrity of 
business dealings or the orderly functioning of authorities and public institutions, or  
c) such disclosure is necessary to correct publicly disseminated incorrect facts which are 
likely to substantially undermine confid ence in the administration; such decision shall be 
taken by the highest revenue authority responsible in mutual agreement with Federal Ministry 
of Finance; the taxpayer is to be consulted before correction of the facts.  
(5) Wilfully false statements by the  person concerned may be disclosed to the law enforcement 
authorities.  
(6) The retrieval of protected data that have been stored in an automated filing system for one of the 
procedures/proceedings specified under subsection (2) number 1 above shall be perm issible only insofar 
as such retrieval facilitates a procedure/proceedings described under subsection (2) number 1a or 1b 
above or facilitates the permissible transmission of protected data by a revenue authority to the data 
subject or to a third party. To  protect tax secrecy, the Federal Ministry of Finance may stipulate, by way 
of ordinances issued with the consent of the Bundesrat, which technical and organisational measures 
must be adopted to prevent the unauthorised retrieval of data. In particular, th e Federal Ministry of 
Finance may adopt more detailed rules on the type of data that are permissible to retrieve and on the set 
of public officials who are authorised to retrieve such data. Ordinances pertaining to motor vehicle tax, 
aviation tax, insuranc e tax, import and export duties, and excise duties with the exception of beer duty 
shall not require the consent of the Bundesrat.  
(7) In the event that data subject to tax secrecy are transmitted in accordance with section 87a(4) or (7) 
by a public offici al or persons of equivalent status under subsection (3) above using DE -Mail services 
within the meaning of section 1 of the DE -Mail Act, no unauthorised disclosure or use and no Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 12 of 141 unauthorised retrieval of data subject to tax secrecy shall be deemed to have occurred if during 
transmission a temporary automated decryption is performed by an accredited service provider for the 
purpose of checking for malware and for the purpose of forwarding the data to the addressee of the DE -
Mail message.  
(8) The establishmen t of an automated procedure that enables protected data to be cross -checked 
within a revenue authority or among various revenue authorities shall be permissible insofar as the 
further processing or the disclosure of such data is permissible and such proced ure is suitable in light of 
the legitimate interests of the data subject and the functions to be performed by the participating revenue 
authorities.  
(9) When personal data are to be processed, revenue authorities may use the services of a processor as 
defined in Article 4(8) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 only if the data in question are processed exclusively 
by persons who are required to observe tax secrecy.  
(10) Revenue authorities shall be permitted to disclose special categories of personal data as descr ibed 
in Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 to public or non -public entities if the conditions stipulated in 
subsection (4) or (5) above have been met and an exception under Article 9(2) of Regulation (EU) 
2016/679 or under section 31c applies.  
(11) I f protected data have been disclosed in accordance with subsections (4) or (5) above to  
1.  a person who is not required to observe tax secrecy,  
2.  a public entity that is not a revenue authority, or  
3.  a non -public entity,  
the recipient may store, alter , use or transmit these data only for the purpose for which they were 
disclosed to him. In cases where such protected data become known to public officials or persons of 
equivalent status under subsection (3) above on the basis of such a disclosure, their obligation to 
observe tax secrecy shall remain unaffected.  
Section 30a  
(rescinded ) 
Section 31  
Disclos ure of tax bases  
(1) The revenue authorities shall be obliged to disclose to public -law entities, including religious 
communities which are public -law enti ties, tax bases, base amounts of non -personal taxes and other tax 
amounts for the purpose of assessing such levies connected with these tax bases, base amounts of non -
personal taxes or other tax amounts. The obligation to disclose shall not apply insofar a s this would 
involve a disproportionate amount of time and effort. Upon request, the revenue authorities may disclose 
to public -law entities the names and addresses of their members who are obliged, in principle, to pay 
levies within the meaning of the fir st sentence above as well as the duties assessed by the revenue 
authority with regard to the entity, insofar as knowledge of these data is necessary for the discharge of 
public tasks falling within the entity’s responsibility and insofar as the data subjec t has no overriding 
interests that merit protection.  
(2) Revenue authorities shall be obliged to disclose data subjects’ data that are protected under section 
30 to statutory social insurance providers, the Federal Employment Agency and the Artists’ Social  
Security Fund, insofar as knowledge of such data is necessary to determine insurance requirements or 
to assess contributions, including artists’ social security contributions, or insofar as the data subject 
submits an application for disclosure. This disc losure obligation shall not apply if carrying out such a 
disclosure would involve a disproportionate effort.  
(3) The names and addresses of owners of real property which have become known through the 
administration of real property tax and which are protec ted under section 30 may be used by the 
authorities responsible for administering real property tax for the administration of other fiscal charges 
and for the discharge of other public tasks or may be disclosed by those authorities on request to the 
respon sible courts, authorities or legal persons under public law, as long as the data subject has no 
overriding i nterests that merit protection.  
Section 31a  
Disclosure for the purpose of countering unlawful employment and the misappropriation of 
benefits  
(1) Th e disclosure of a data subject’s data that are protected under section 30 shall be permissible 
insofar as such disclosure is necessary  
1. to conduct criminal proceedings, administrative fine proceedings or any other court or  
administrative proceedings with  the aim of  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 13 of 141 a)  countering unlawful employment or undeclared work, or  
b)  deciding whether  
aa)  a licence under the Temporary Employment Act should be issued, withdrawn or 
revoked, or  
bb) benefits paid from public funds should be approved, granted, recove red, 
refunded, continued to be granted or allowed to be retained,  
or 
2. to assert a claim for repayment of benefits paid from public funds.  
(2) In the cases referred to in subsection (1) above, the revenue authorities shall be obliged to disclose 
to the co mpetent body the facts required in each case. In the cases referred to in subsection (1) 
numbers 1(b) and 2 above, information shall also be disclosed upon application by the data subject. The 
obligation to disclose referred to in the first and second sent ence of this subsection shall not apply 
insofar as this would involve a disproportionate amount of time and effort.  
Section 31b  
Disclosure for the purposes of countering money laundering and terrorist financing  
(1) The disclosure, to the respective compete nt body, of a data subject’s data that are protected under 
section 30 shall be permissible, even in the absence of a request, insofar as such disclosure serves one 
of the following purposes:  
1.  conducting criminal proceedings for money laundering or terro rist financing in accordance 
with section 1(1) and (2) of the Money Laundering Act,  
2.  preventing, detecting and combating money laundering or terrorist financing in accordance 
with section 1(1) and (2) of the Money Laundering Act,  
3. conducting administr ative fine proceedings in accordance with section 56 of the Money 
Laundering Act against obligated parties under section 2(1) numbers 13 to 16 of the Money 
Laundering Act,  
4.  taking measures or issuing orders in accordance with section 51(2) of the Money 
Laundering Act against obligated parties under section 2(1) numbers 13 to 16 of the Money 
Laundering Act or  
5. the performance of tasks by the Financial Intelligence Unit as specified in section 28(1) of 
the Money Laundering Act.  
(2) Revenue authorities mu st report matters to the Financial Intelligence Unit without undue delay, and 
irrespective of the value involved, if there are facts indicating that  
1.  the assets connected to the reportable matter are the object of a crime under section 261 of 
the Crimin al Code or  
2.  the assets are connected to terrorist financing.  
Reports to the Financial Intelligence Unit shall be sent via electronic data transmission, using a secure 
method that guarantees the confidentiality and integrity of the data set. In exceptio nal cases, a report 
may be sent via regular mail if data transmission is disrupted. Section 45(3) and (4) of the Money 
Laundering Act shall apply accordingly.  
(3) The revenue authorities shall notify the competent administrative authority, without delay, o f facts 
indicating that  
1.  an obligated party under section 2(1) numbers 9 to 13 of the Money Laundering Act has 
committed or is committing an administrative offence under section 56 of the Money Laundering Act 
or 
2.  the conditions have been met to take  measures or issue orders in accordance with section 
51(2) of the Money Laundering Act against obligated parties under section 2(1) numbers 13 to 16 of 
the Money Laundering Act.  
(4) Section 47(3) of the Money Laundering Act shall apply accordingly.  
Section  31c 
The processing of special categories of personal data for statistical purposes by revenue 
authorities  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 14 of 141 (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, revenue authorities shall 
be permitted to process special categories of personal data as described in Article 9(1) of Regulation 
(EU) 2016/679 for statistical purposes, even without the consent of the data subject, if such processing 
for statistical purposes is necessary and the interests of the controller in processing the  data significantly 
override the data subject’s interests in not having the data processed. The controller shall provide for 
suitable and specific measures to safeguard the data subject’s interests; the second sentence of section 
22(2) of the Federal Data Protection Act shall apply accordingly.  
(2) The rights of data subjects laid down in Articles 15, 16, 18 and 21 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 shall 
be restricted to the extent that (a) such rights are likely to render impossible, or to substantially impede, 
the achievement of these statistical purposes and (b) such restriction is necessary for the fulfilment of 
these statistical purposes.   
(3) In addition to the measures specified in the second sentence of section 22(2) of the Federal Data 
Protection Act, spe cial categories of personal data as described in Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 
2016/679 that are processed for statistical purposes shall be pseudonymised or anonymised as soon as 
possible after the statistical purpose has been achieved, unless such pseu donymisation or 
anonymisation runs counter to the legitimate interests of the data subject. Until such pseudonymisation 
or anonymisation occurs, those data items that enable specific details about personal or material 
circumstances to be attributed to an i dentified or identifiable person shall be stored separately. Such 
data items may be merged with such specific details only insofar as this is necessary to achieve the 
statistical purpose.  
Fifth Chapter  
Limited liability of public officials  
Section 32  
Limit ed liability of public officials  
Where a breach of official duty by a public official results in  
1. a tax or ancillary tax payment not being assessed, levied or recovered at all or on time, or 
the amount assessed, levied or recovered being too low, or  
2. a tax refund or tax rebate being incorrectly granted, or  
3. a tax base or a tax share not being assessed at all or on time or the amount assessed being 
too low,  
the public official may be held liable only if the breach of official duty is punishable by law . 
Section 32a  
Revenue authorities’ obligation to provide information where data are collected from the data 
subject  
(1) In addition to the exception specified in Article 13(4) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, the obligation of 
revenue authorities to inform the  data subject in accordance with Article 13(3) of Regulation (EU) 
2016/679 shall not apply if the provision of information regarding the intended further processing or 
disclosure  
1.  would jeopardise the effective performance of the functions, as described  in Article 23(1)(d) 
to (h) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, that lie within the jurisdiction of revenue authorities and the 
revenue authorities’ interest in not providing the information overrides the interests of the data 
subject,  
2.  would endanger public s ecurity or order or would be detrimental to the welfare of the 
Federation or a Land  and the revenue authorities’ interest in not providing the information overrides 
the interests of the data subject,  
3.  impede the ability of the Federation, a Land  or a mu nicipality – as the legal representative of 
a revenue authority – to establish, exercise or defend civil law claims or to defend itself against civil 
law claims within the meaning of Article 23(1)(j) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and the revenue 
authority is  not required under civil  law to provide information, or  
4.  would jeopardise the confidential disclosure of pro tected data to public entities.  
(2) The effective performance of the functions, as described in Article 23(1)(d) to (h) of Regulation (EU) 
2016/ 679, that lie within the jurisdiction of revenue authorities shall be deemed jeopardised in particular if 
the provision of information  
1.  could enable the data subject or third parties  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 15 of 141 a) to conceal facts or circumstances that are relevant for tax purpose s, 
b) to cover up leads that are relevant for tax purposes,  
c) to tailor the manner and extent of their cooperation with revenue authorities to the level 
of information held by the revenue authorities,  
or 
2.  makes it possible to draw inferences about the design of automated risk management 
systems or planned control/auditing measures  
and would thereby seriously hinder the detection of facts or circumstances that are relevant for tax 
purposes.  
(3) In cases where a data subject is not provided with informati on in accordance with subsection (1) 
above, the revenue authorities shall take suitable measures to protect the data subject’s legitimate 
interests.  
(4) If, in cases where subsection (1) applies, no notification is provided because of a reason that is 
temp orary in nature, revenue authorities shall fulfil their obligation to provide information, taking into 
account the specific circumstances of the case, within a reasonable period, but no later than two weeks, 
after this reason ceases to apply.  
(5) If the pr ovision of information relates to the transmission of personal data by revenue authorities to 
authorities responsible for the protection of the constitution, the Federal Intelligence Service, the Military 
Counterintelligence Service or, insofar as the secu rity of the Federation is affected, other Federal 
Defence Ministry authorities, such provision of information shall be permissible only with the consent of 
these entities.  
Section 32b  
Revenue authorities’ obligation to provide information where personal da ta have not been 
obtained from the data subject  
(1) In addition to the exceptions specified in Article 14(5) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and section 
31c(2), the obligation of revenue authorities to inform the data subject in accordance with Article 14(1), 
(2) and (4) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 shall not apply  
1.  insofar as the provision of information  
a) would jeopardise the effective performance of the functions, as described in Article 
23(1)(d) to (h) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, that lie within the ju risdiction of revenue 
authorities or other public entities or  
b) would endanger public security or order or would be otherwise detrimental to the welfare 
of the Federation or a Land  
or 
2.  if the data, their source, their recipients, or the fact that they have been processed in 
accordance with section 30 or another legislative provision, or if the data by their very nature, must be 
kept secret, in particular due to the overriding legitimate interests of a third party in accordance with 
Article 23(1)(i) of R egulation (EU) 2016/679  
and the data subject’s interest in the provision of information is overridden as a result. Section 32a(2) 
shall apply accordingly.  
(2) If the provision of information relates to the transmission of personal data by revenue authorit ies to 
authorities responsible for the protection of the constitution, the Federal Intelligence Service, the Military 
Counterintelligence Service or, insofar as the security of the Federation is affected, other Federal 
Defence Ministry authorities, such pr ovision of information shall be permissible only with the consent of 
these entities.  
(3) In cases where a data subject is not provided with information in accordance with subsection (1) or 
(2) above, the revenue authorities shall take suitable measures to protect the data subject’s legitimate 
interests.  
Section 32c  
Right of access by the data subject  
(1) In their dealings with revenue authorities, data subjects shall not have a right of access as provided in 
Article 15 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 insofar as  
1.  information is not to be provided to the data subject in accordance with section 32b(1) or 
(2), Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 16 of 141 2. the granting of access would impede the Federation, a Land  or a municipality – as the legal 
representative of a revenue authority – in its ability to es tablish, exercise or defend civil law claims or 
to defend itself against civil law claims within the meaning of Article 23(1)(j) of Regulation (EU) 
2016/679; revenue authorities’ obligations to provide information under civil law shall remain 
unaffected,  
3.  personal data  
a)  are stored only because, on the basis of legal provisions, their erasure is not permitted, 
or 
b)  exclusively serve the purposes of backing up data or monitoring data protection  
and the granting of access would require a disproportiona te effort, and suitable technical and 
organisational measures rule out the possibility of processing for other purposes.  
(2) In their requests for access under Article 15 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, data subjects should 
specify the type of data for  which access is to be granted.  
(3) If the personal data are neither automated nor stored in automated filing systems, access shall be 
granted only to the extent that the data subject provides information that makes it possible to locate the 
data, and the effort required to grant access is not disproportionate to the data subject’s stated interest in 
the information.  
(4) If access is refused, the reason(s) for such refusal must be communicated to the data subject, as 
long as the disclosure of the factual and legal  reasons underlying the decision does not jeopardise the 
purpose being pursued by refusing access. The data stored for the purpose of preparing and granting 
access to the data subject may be processed only for this purpose and for purposes of monitoring da ta 
protection; processing for other purposes shall be restricted in accordance with Article 18 of Regulation 
(EU) 2016/679.  
(5) If a data subject is not granted access by a revenue authority, such access shall be granted to the 
Federal Commissioner for Dat a Protection and Freedom of Information upon request by the data subject, 
as long as the competent highest revenue authority does not find that, for the specific case in question, 
granting such access would endanger the security of the Federation or a Land . When the Federal 
Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information notifies the data subject of the findings of 
the data protection review, such notification shall not permit any inferences to be drawn about what the 
revenue authorities know, i nsofar as the revenue authorities have not consented to the granting of more 
extensive access.  
Section 32d  
Form of information or access  
(1) To the extent that rules are not stipulated in Articles 12 to 15 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, the 
revenue authoriti es shall determine at their discretion which procedures, and in particular which form, 
shall be used to provide information and grant access.  
(2) Revenue authorities may also fulfil their obligation to provide information to data subjects in 
accordance wit h Article 13 or 14 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 by making the information available to the 
public, as long as no personal data are published as a result.  
(3) If revenue authorities use electronic means to provide data subjects with information on the collec tion 
or processing of personal data in accordance with Article 13 or 14 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, or if they 
use electronic means to grant data subjects access in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) 
2016/679, section 87a(7) or (8) shall apply accordingly.  
Section 32e  
Relation to other access and information rights  
Insofar as a data subject or third party has a right of access to information from a revenue authority 
pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act of 5 September 2005 (Federal Law Gaze tte I, p. 2272), as 
amended, or pursuant to relevant Land  legislation, Articles 12 to 15 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 in 
conjunction with sections 32a to 32d shall apply accordingly. More extensive rights to information on tax 
data are thus ruled out. Secti on 30(4) number two shall not apply in this case.  
Section 32f  
Right to rectification and erasure, right to object  
(1) As a supplement to the provision laid down in Article 18(1)(a) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, if the 
accuracy of personal data is contested by the data subject and it cannot be determined whether the data 
are accurate or inaccurate, this shall not cause processing to be restricted if the data serve as the basis 
for an administrative act that can no longer be cancelled, amended or corrected. Th e unresolved matter 
shall be documented in a suitable manner. The contested data may be processed only with reference to 
the fact that the matter remains unresolved.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 17 of 141 (2) If, in cases of non -automated data processing, erasure is impossible or would require 
disproportionate effort due to a particular manner of storage and the data subject’s interest in such 
erasure is deemed low, then the data subject’s right to obtain erasure and the revenue authorities’ 
obligation to conduct erasure in accordance with Artic le 17(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 shall not 
apply, in addition to the exceptions specified in Article 17(3) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679. In such cases, 
a processing restriction in accordance with Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 shall apply in lie u of 
an erasure. The first and second sentences above shall not apply if the personal data were processed 
unlawfully.  
(3) As a supplement to the provisions laid down in Article 18(1)(b) and (c) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, 
the first and second sentences of  subsection (1) above shall apply in the cases referred to in Article 
17(1)(a) and (d) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 as long as and to the extent that the revenue authorities 
have reason to believe that an erasure would be detrimental to the legitimate inter ests of the data 
subject. Revenue authorities shall notify the data subject of the processing restriction unless such 
notification is impossible or would require disproportionate effort.  
(4) As a supplement to Article 17(3)(b) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, subsection (1) above shall apply in 
the cases referred to in Article (17)(1)(a) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 if erasure stands in conflict with  
contractual retention periods.  
(5) The right to file an objection with financial authorities in accordance with A rticle 21(1) of Regulation 
(EU) 2016/679 shall not apply insofar as a compelling public interest in the processing of data overrides 
the interests of the data subject or insofar as such processing is required by law.  
Section 32g  
Data protection officers fo r revenue authorities  
Section 5(2) to (5) and sections 6 and 7 of the Federal Data Protection Act shall apply accordingly to the 
data protection officers who are to be designated by revenue authorities in accordance with Article 37 of 
Regulation (EU) 2016/ 679. 
Section 32h  
Data protection supervision, data protection impact assessments  
(1) The Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information under section 8 of the 
Federal Data Protection Act shall be responsible for the supervision of reve nue authorities as regards 
the processing of personal data within the scope of this Code. Sections 13 to 16 of the Federal Data 
Protecti on Act shall apply accordingly.  
(2) If any revenue authority develops an automated procedure for the revenue authorities  of other Länder  
or of the Federation for the purpose of processing personal data within the scope of this Code, it shall be 
incumbent upon that revenue authority to conduct a data protection impact assessment in accordance 
with Article 35 of Regulation (E U) 2016/679. Insofar as such procedures are adopted by Land  and 
federal financial authorities without alteration to functions that are relevant for purposes of data 
protection, the data protection impact assessment shall likewise apply to the adopting reve nue 
authorities.  
(3) Land  legislation may stipulate that the Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of 
Information shall be responsible for supervising the processing of personal data within the framework of 
Land  or municipal tax legislation,  as long as (a) such data processing pertains to tax bases regulated by 
federal law or is based on specifications that are uniform nationwide and (b) the administrative costs 
incurred by the Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Informati on as a result of this 
conferral of responsibility are borne by th e respective Land . 
Section 32i  
Judicial protection  
(1) Recourse to fiscal courts shall be possible in disputes over rights under Article 78(1) and (2) of 
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 between (a)  an affected public entity under section 6(1) to (1c) and (2) or its 
legal representative, an affected non -public entity under section 6(1d) and (1e) or a data subject and (b) 
the competent federal or Land  supervisory authority.  The first sentence above sh all not apply in cases 
where section 2a(4) applies.  
(2) Data subjects shall be permitted to take recourse to fiscal courts for the purpose of bringing actions 
against revenue authorities or revenue authorities’ processors regarding infringements of data pr otection 
provisions that fall within the scope of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or regarding infringements of data 
subjects’ rights specified therein.  
(3) In cases where a supervisory authority responsible for supervising other public entities or non -public 
entities pursuant to the Federal Data Protection Act or Land  legislation issues a legally binding decision 
that negates, in full or in part, the obligation of a non -public entity or other public entity to cooperate with 
revenue authorities under this Code or other tax legislation, the competent revenue authority may bring 
an action to determine whether an obligation to cooperate exists. The entity that the revenue authority 
claims has an obligation to cooperate shall be summoned.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 18 of 141 (4) In cases where subsections  (1) to (3) above apply, the Code of Procedure for Fiscal Courts shall 
apply in accordance with subsections (5) to (10) below.  
(5) For proceedings under subsection (1), first sentence, and subsection (3) above, the fiscal court in 
whose district the releva nt competent supervisory authority’s head office is located shall have local 
jurisdiction. For proceedings under subsection (2) above, the fiscal court in whose district the respondent 
revenue authority or respondent processor is located shall have local j urisdiction.  
(6) In proceedings under the first sentence of subsection (1) above, the participating parties shall 
include:  
1.  the public entity, non -public entity or data subject as plaintiff or claimant,  
2.  the competent federal or Land  supervisory auth ority as defendant or respondent,  
3.  parties summoned in accordance with section 60 of the Code of Procedure for Fiscal Courts 
and 
4.  the highest federal or Land  revenue authority that has joined the proceedings in accordance 
with section 122(2) of the C ode of Procedure for Fiscal Courts.  
(7) In proceedings under subsection (2) above, the participating parties shall include:  
1.  the data subject as plaintiff or claimant,  
2.  the revenue authority or processor as defendant or respondent,  
3.  parties summon ed in accordance with section 60 of the Code of Procedure for Fiscal Courts 
and 
4.  the highest federal or Land  revenue authority that has joined the proceedings in accordance 
with section 122(2) of the Code of Procedure for Fiscal Courts.  
(8) In proceedin gs under subsection (3) above, the participating parties shall include:  
1.  the competent revenue authority as plaintiff or claimant,  
2.  the federal or Land  supervisory authority that issued the legally binding decision, as 
defendant or respondent,  
3.  the entity that the revenue authority claims has an obligation to cooperate, as summoned 
party, and  
4.  the highest federal or Land  revenue authority that has joined the proceedings in accordance 
with section 122(2) of the Code of Procedure for Fiscal Court s. 
(9) No preliminary proceedings shall take place.  
(10) Actions or claims brought in proceedings under the first sentence of subsection (1) above shall have 
a suspensive effect. The competent supervisory authority may not issue an order of immediate 
enfor cement to a revenue authority, its legal representative or its processor.  
Section 32j  
Request for court judgement in cases where an adequacy decision by the European Commission 
is presumed to be contrary to law  
If the Federal Commissioner for Data Protecti on and Freedom of Information or an entity responsible for 
monitoring data protection under Land  law believes that a European Commission adequacy decision, the 
validity of which will determine the decision over a data subject’s complaint concerning the pro cessing of 
personal data, is contrary to law, then section 21 of the Federal Data Protection Act shall apply.  
Second Part  
Legal provisions on tax liability  
First Chapter  
Taxpayer  
Section 33  
Taxpayer  
(1) “Taxpayer” shall mean any person who owes a tax, who is liable for a tax, or who is obliged to 
withhold and remit to revenue authorities a tax which is due on behalf of a third party, to file a tax return, 
to provide collateral, to keep accounts and records or to discharge other obligations imposed by the ta x 
laws.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 19 of 141 (2) “Taxpayer” shall not mean a person who is obliged with regard to tax matters of a third person to 
furnish information, to produce documents, to submit an expert opinion or to authorise entry to 
properties,  business premises and offices.  
Section  34 
Obligations of legal representatives and asset managers  
(1) The legal representatives of natural and legal persons, and the managing directors of associations 
and asset pools without legal capacity shall fulfil the tax obligations of these entities. In  particular, they 
shall ensure that taxes are paid from the funds they manage.  
(2) To the extent that associations without legal capacity do not have a managing director, their 
members or partners shall fulfil the duties within the meaning of subsection (1 ) above. Any member or 
partner may be held liable by the revenue authority. The first and second sentences above shall apply to 
pools of assets without legal capacity subject to the proviso that the persons entitled to the assets fulfil 
the tax obligations . 
(3) Where persons other than the owners of the assets or their legal representatives are responsible for 
asset management, the asset managers shall, within their management competence, have the 
obligations referred to in subsection (1) above.  
Section 35  
Obligations of persons with powers of disposal  
Persons with powers of disposal acting on their own behalf or on behalf of a third party shall have the 
obligations of a legal representative (section 34(1)) to the extent that they are able to fulfil them de jure 
and de facto . 
Section 36  
Termination of the authority to represent  
Termination of the authority to represent or of the power of disposal shall not affect the obligations 
pursuant to sections 34 and 35 to the extent that these apply to the period in wh ich the authority to 
represent or the power of disposal was valid and that the person obliged is able to fulfil them.  
Second Chapter  
Tax debtor -creditor  relationship2 
Section 37  
Claims arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship  
(1) Claims arising fr om the tax debtor -creditor relationship shall be the tax claim, the tax rebate claim, the 
liability claim, the claim to an ancillary tax payment, the refund claim pursuant to subsection (2) below 
and the tax refund claims set out in individual tax laws.  
(2) Where a tax, a tax rebate, a liability amount or an ancillary tax payment was paid or repaid in the 
absence of legal grounds, the person on whose account the payment was made shall be entitled to a 
refund from the recipient of the amount paid or repaid. This shall also apply where the legal grounds for 
the payment or repayment are subsequently abolished. In the case of cession, pledging or seizure, the 
claim may also be asserted against the person ceding, the p ledger or the execution debtor.  
Footnote 2 : Steuerschuldverhältnis , i.e. , the legal relationship between the person owing the tax and the 
entity to which it accrues (state).  
Section 38  
Arising of claims from the tax debtor -creditor relationship  
Claims shall arise from the tax debtor -creditor relation ship as soon as the matter to which the law 
attaches liability for payment has occurred.  
Section 39  
Attribution  
(1) Assets shall be attributable to their owner.  
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) above, the following provisions shall appl y: 
1. Where a person other than the owner exercises effective control over an asset in such a 
way that he can, as a rule, economically exclude the owner from affecting the asset during the normal 
period of its useful life, the asset shall be attributable t o this person. In the case of fiduciary 
relationships, assets shall be attributable to the beneficiary, in the case of transferred ownerships for 
security purposes to the security provider, and in the case of proprietary possessions to the 
proprietary poss essor.  
2. Assets to which several persons are jointly entitled shall be attributable proportionally to the 
participants insofar as taxation  requires separate attribution.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 20 of 141 Sectio n 40 
Actions contrary to law or public policy  
It shall be immaterial for taxati on when an action that is completely or partly taxable violates a statutory 
regulation or prohibition or is contrary to public policy.  
Section 41  
Invalid legal transactions  
(1) Where a legal transaction is or becomes invalid this shall be immaterial for ta xation to the extent that 
and as long as the persons involved nevertheless allow the economic outcome of this legal transaction 
to occur and to remain. This shall not apply where the tax laws provide otherwise.  
(2) Fictitious transactions and actions shall  be immaterial for taxation. Where a fictitious transaction 
conceals another legal transaction, the concealed legal transaction shall be decisive for taxation.  
Section 42  
Abuse of tax planning schemes  
(1) It shall not be possible to circumvent tax legisla tion by abusing legal options for tax planning 
schemes. Where the element of an individual tax law’s provision to prevent circumventions of tax has 
been fulfilled, the legal consequences shall be determined pursuant to that provision. Where this is not 
the case, the tax claim shall in the event of an abuse within the meaning of subsection (2) below arise in 
the same manner as it arises through the use of legal options appropriate to the e conomic transactions 
concerned.  
(2) An abuse shall be deemed to exist where an inappropriate legal option is selected which, in 
comparison with an appropriate option, leads to tax advantages unintended by law for the taxpayer or a 
third party. This shall not apply where the taxpayer provides evidence of non -tax reasons for t he selected 
option which are relevant when viewed from an overall perspective.  
Section 43  
Tax debtor, creditor of a tax rebate  
Tax legislation shall stipulate the tax debtor or creditor of a tax rebate. It shall also stipulate whether a 
third party is to p ay the t ax on behalf of the tax debtor.  
Section 44  
Joint and several debtors  
(1) Persons who concurrently owe or are liable for the same obligation arising from the tax debtor -
creditor relationship or who must be assessed jointly shall be joint and several  debtors. Unless otherwise 
stipulated, each joint and several debtor shall owe the entire obligation.  
(2) Fulfilment by a joint and several debtor shall also take effect for the other debtors. The same shall 
apply to the set -off and any securities provided . Other facts shall only take effect for and against the joint 
and several debtor personally affected by them. The provisions of sections 268 to 280 with regard to the 
limitation of enforcement in the case of joint asse ssment shall remain unaffected.  
Secti on 45  
Universal succession  
(1) In the case of universal succession the debts and receivables arising from the tax debtor -creditor 
relationship shall pass to the legal successor. However, in the case of succession by inheritance this 
shall not apply to coer cive fines.  
(2) Heirs shall be liable for debts payable from the estate pursuant to the provisions of civil law with 
regard to the heir’s liability for obligations of the estate. Provisions creating a tax liability of the heirs shall 
remain unaffected.  
Section 46  
Cession, pledging, seizure  
(1) Entitlements to the refund of taxes, liability amounts, ancillary tax payments and tax rebates may be 
ceded, pledged and seized.  
(2) However, the act of cession shall take effect only once the creditor declares it aft er the claim has 
arisen to the competent revenue authority in the form set out in subsection (3) below.  
(3) The act of cession shall be notified to the competent revenue authority on an officially prescribed 
form, indicating the person ceding, the benefici ary of cession, the nature and amount of the entitlement 
ceded and the reason for cession. The notification shall be signed by the person ceding and the 
beneficiary of cession.  
(4) The commercial acquisition of claims to refunds or rebates for the purpose of collection or other 
liquidation for own account shall not be permissible. This shall not apply in the case of cession for 
security purposes. Only enterprises authorised to conduct bank business shall be entitled to 
commercially acquire or collect claims  ceded for security purposes.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 21 of 141 (5) Where the act of cession has been notified to the revenue authority, the person ceding and the 
beneficiary of cession shall be obliged to accept the validity of the notified cession in relation to the 
revenue authority eve n if such cession does not occur or is ineffective or is void due to contravention of 
subsection (4) above.  
(6) An attachment and transfer order or an attachment and sequestration order may not be issued before 
the claim has arisen. Any attachment and tran sfer orders or attachment and sequestration orders 
obtained in breach of this prohibition shall be void. The provisions of subsections (2) to (5) above shall 
apply mutatis mutandis  to pledging.  
(7) In the case of attachments of claims to refunds or rebates , the revenue authority which decided or 
must decide on the claim shall be deemed to be the third party debtor within the meaning of sections 829 
and 845 of the  Code of Civil Procedure.  
Section 47  
Expiration  
Claims arising from the tax debtor -creditor rela tionship shall expire, in particular, through payment 
(sections 224, 224a and 225), set -off (section 226), remission (sections 163 and 227), termination of a 
limitation period (sections 169 to 171 and 228 to 232) and due to fulfilment of the condition wher e claims 
are subject to a condition subsequent.  
Section 48  
Payment by third parties, liability of third parties  
(1) Payments to the revenue authority arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship may also be 
effected by third parties.  
(2) Third parties  may contractually agree to guarantee payments within the meaning of subsection (1) 
above.  
Section 49  
Missing persons  
When a person is missing and presumed dead, the date at the close of which the decision on the 
declaration of death of the missing person becomes final and binding shall be deemed the date of death 
for taxation purposes.  
Section 50  
Expiration and unconditionality of excise duty, transfer of the conditional excise duty debt  
(1) Where a tax privilege is granted pursuant to excise duty laws and  subject to the condition that goods 
liable to excise duty must be used for a special purpose, the duty shall expire completely or partly in 
accordance with the relief as soon as the condition is fulfilled or where the goods perish without the tax 
having p reviously become unconditional.  
(2) The conditional tax debt shall be transferred to the eligible acquirer if the goods are passed on to him 
for the intended purpose by the tax debtor before the condition has been fulfilled.  
(3) The duty shall become uncon ditional  
1. where the goods are used contrary to the intended purpose or cannot be used anymore for 
this purpose. Where it is impossible to determine the whereabouts of the goods, they shall be 
considered as not having been used for the intended purpose, u nless the beneficiary provides 
evidence to the contrary,  
2. in other cases stipulated by law.  
Third Chapter  
Tax-privileged purposes  
Section 51  
General  
(1) The following provisions shall apply where the Code grants tax privileges to a corporation on account  
of its serving directly and exclusively public -benefit, charitable or religious purposes (tax -privileged 
purposes). A corporation shall be understood to mean a corporation, an association or a pool of assets 
as defined in the Corporation Tax Act. Function al subdivisions (departments) of corporations shall not be 
treated as independent taxable entities.  
(2) Where the tax -privileged purposes are achieved abroad, the tax privilege shall be conditional upon 
natural persons who have their residence or their hab itual abode within the territory of the application of 
this Code being advanced or the activity of the corporation, alongside achieving the tax -privileged 
purposes, also being able to contribute to the reputation of the Federal Republic of Germany abroad.  
(3) A tax privilege shall furthermore require that the corporation does not, pursuant to its statutes and in 
its actual management, advance efforts within the meaning of section 4 of the Federal Constitution Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 22 of 141 Protection Act and does not contravene the conce pt of international understanding. In the case of 
corporations which are listed in the Federation’s or a Land ’s report on the protection of the constitution 
as an extremist organisation, it shall be refutably assumed that the conditions of the first senten ce above 
are not fulfilled. The revenue authority shall inform the authority responsible for the protection of the 
constitution of facts substantiating the suspicion of efforts within the meaning of section 4 of the Federal 
Constitution Protection Act or c ontraventions of the concept of international understanding.  
Section 52  
Public -benefit purposes  
(1) A corporation shall serve public -benefit purposes if its activity is dedicated to the altruistic 
advancement of the general public in material, spiritual or  moral respects. It shall not be deemed an 
advancement of the general public if the group of persons benefiting from such advancement is 
circumscribed, for instance by membership of a family or the workforce of an enterprise, or can never be 
other than sma ll as a result of its definition, especially in terms of geographical or professional attributes. 
Advancement of the general public may not be contended merely because a corporation allocates its 
funds to a public -law entity.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of subsection (1) above, the following shall be recognised as advancement 
of the general public:  
1.  the advancement of science and research;  
2.  the advancement of religion;  
3.  the advancement of public health and of public hygiene, in particular the pre vention and 
control of communicable diseases, also by hospitals within the meaning of section 67, and of 
epizootic diseases;  
4.  the advancement of assistance to young and old people;  
5.  the advancement of art and culture;  
6.  the advancement of the prote ction and preservation of historical monuments;  
7.   the advancement of upbringing, adult education and vocational training including 
assistance for students;  
8.  the advancement of nature conservation and of Land scape management within the 
meaning of the Federal Nature Conservation Act and the nature conservation acts of the Länder , of 
environmental protection, of coastal defence and of flood defence;  
9.  the advancement of public welfare, in particular of the purposes of the officially recognised 
voluntar y welfare associations (section 23 of the VAT Implementing Ordinance), their subsidiary 
associations and their affiliated organisations and institutions;  
10.  the advancement of relief for people persecuted on political, racial or religious grounds, for 
refugees, expellees, ethnic German repatriates who migrated to the Germany between 1950 and 1 
January 1993, ethnic German repatriates migrating to Germany after 1 January 1993, war victims, 
dependents of deceased war victims, war disabled and prisoners of wa r, civilian war disabled and 
people with disabilities as well as relief for victims of crime; the advancement of the commemoration 
of persecutees, war and disaster victims; the advancement of the tracing service for missing persons;  
11.  the advancement of  life saving;  
12.  the advancement of fire prevention, occupational health and safety, disaster control and civil 
defence as well as of accident prevention;  
13.  the advancement of internationalism, of tolerance in all areas of culture and of the concept 
of international understanding;  
14.  the advancement of the protection of animals;  
15.  the advancement of development cooperation;  
16.  the advancement of consumer counselling and consumer protection;  
17.  the advancement of welfare for prisoners and form er prisoners;  
18.  the advancement of equal rights for women and men;  
19.  the advancement of the protection of marriage and the family;  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 23 of 141 20.  the advancement of crime prevention;  
21.  the advancement of sport (chess shall be considered to be a sport);  
22.  the advancement of local heritage and traditions;  
23.  the advancement of animal husbandry, of plant cultivation, of allotment gardening, of 
traditional customs including regional carnival, of the welfare of servicemen and reservists, of 
amateur radio, of  aeromodelling and of dog sports;  
24.  the general advancement of democratic government in the territory of application of this 
Code; this shall not include endeavours which are solely in pursuit of specific individual interests of a 
civic nature or which  are restricted to the local -government level;  
25.  the advancement of active citizenship in support of public -benefit, charitable or religious 
purposes.  
To the extent that the purpose pursued by the corporation does not fall under the first sentence above , 
but the general public is correspondingly advanced altruistically in material, spiritual or moral aspects, 
this purpose may be declared as being for the public benefit. The highest revenue authority of each Land  
shall designate a revenue authority within  the meaning of the Fiscal Administration Act which is 
responsible for decisions pursuant to the second sentence above.  
Section 53  
Charitable purposes  
A corporation shall be deemed to serve charitable purposes if its activity is dedicated to altruistic sup port 
for persons  
1. who on account of their physical, mental or emotional state are dependent upon the 
assistance of others, or  
2. whose means are not greater than four times the standard rate of social assistance as 
defined in section 28 of the Social Cod e, Book XII; in the case of a single person or single parent, five 
times the standard rate shall apply instead of four times. This shall not apply to persons whose assets 
are sufficient to effect a lasting improvement in their upkeep and who may reasonably  be expected to 
use those assets for such purpose. In the case of persons whose financial circumstances have been 
transformed by special reasons into a state of need, the means or assets may exceed the stated 
limits. Means for the purposes of this provisio n shall be  
a) income as defined in section 2(1) of the Income Tax Act, and  
b) other means intended or suitable for the provision of subsistence  
accruing to all household members. Maintenance payments, both paid and received, shall also be 
taken into accou nt. As defined here, the need for economic assistance shall be deemed proven for 
persons who receive benefits pursuant to the Social Code, Book II or XII; the Housing Benefits Act; 
section 27a of the Federal War Victims’ Relief Act; or section 6a of the Fe deral Child Benefits Act. 
The corporation may provide proof on the basis of the respective benefits notice applicable for the 
period of support or on the basis of a confirmation from the benefits provider. The requirement to 
provide proof of the need for e conomic assistance may be waived upon application by the corporation 
if, based on the particular type of support provided, it can be assured that support is provided only to 
persons in need of economic assistance as defined here; section 60a(3) to (5) shal l apply accordingly 
with regard to notifications waiving the requirement to provide proof.  
Section 54  
Religious purposes  
(1) A corporation shall serve religious purposes if its activity is dedicated to the altruistic advancement of 
a religious community wh ich is a public -law entity.  
(2) These purposes shall include, in particular, building, decorating and maintaining houses of worship 
and religious community centres, conducting religious services, training priests, providing religious 
teaching, conducting b urials and safeguarding the remembrance of the dead, also administering church 
assets, remunerating members of the clergy, church officials and servants of the church, and providing 
old-age and disability pensions for these persons and their dependants.  
Section 55  
Altruistic activity  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 24 of 141 (1) Advancement or support shall be provided altruistically if it does not primarily serve the corporation’s 
own economic purposes, for instance commercial or other gainful purposes, and the following 
requirements are met:  
1. The funds of the corporation may be used only for the purposes set out in the statutes. 
Members or partners (members for the purposes of these provisions) may receive neither profit 
shares nor in their capacity as members any other allocations from the fund s of the corporation. The 
corporation may use its funds neither for the direct nor for the indirect advancement or support of 
political parties.  
2. On termination of their membership or on dissolution or liquidation of the corporation, 
members may not rece ive more than their paid -up capital shares and the fair market value of their 
contributions in kind.  
3. The corporation may not provide a benefit for any person by means of expenditure 
unrelated to the purpose of the corporation or disproportionately high remuneration.  
4. Where the corporation is dissolved or liquidated or where its former purpose ceases to 
apply, the assets of the corporation in excess of the members’ paid -up capital shares and the fair 
market value of their contributions in kind may be us ed only for tax -privileged purposes (dedication of 
assets). This requirement shall also be met if the assets are to be assigned to another tax -privileged 
corporation or to a legal person under public law for tax -privileged purposes.  
5. Subject to section 62, the corporation shall in principle use its funds promptly for the tax -
privileged purposes set out in its statutes. The use of funds for the acquisition or creation of assets 
serving the purposes set out in the statutes shall also constitute an appropri ate use. Funds shall be 
deemed to have been used promptly where they are used for the tax -privileged purposes set out in 
the statutes by no later than two calendar or financial years following their accrual.  
(2) In calculating the fair market value (subsec tion (1) numbers 2 and 4 above) the circumstances 
prevailing at the time at which the contributions in kind were made shall apply.  
(3) The provisions relating to the members of the corporation (subsection (1) numbers 1, 2 and 4 above) 
shall apply in the ca se of foundations to the donors and their heirs, and, in the case of undertakings of a 
commercial nature of legal persons under public law, shall apply mutatis mutandis  to the corporation with 
the proviso that for assets withdrawn at book value from busine ss capital pursuant to section 6(1) 
number 4, fourth sentence, of the Income Tax Act the book value of the withdrawal replaces the fair 
market value.  
Section 56  
Exclusivity  
Exclusivity shall be deemed to exist if the sole pursuit of a corporation is the ta x-privileged purposes set 
out in the statutes.  
Section 57  
Directness  
(1) A corporation shall pursue the tax -privileged purposes set out in the statutes directly if the corporation 
itself achieves these purposes. This may also be achieved by aides if, in te rms of the circumstances of 
the case, in particular in terms of the legal and actual relationship between the corporation and the aide, 
the activity of the aide is to be regarded as activity by the corporation itself.  
(2) A corporation in which tax -privile ged corporations are combined shall be deemed equivalent to a 
corporation directly pursuing tax -privileged purposes.  
Section 58  
Activities having no detrimental effect on tax privilege  
Tax-privileged status shall not be precluded in the event that  
1. a cor poration procures funds for the achievement of the tax -privileged purposes of another 
corporation or for the achievement of tax -privileged purposes by a legal person under public law; the 
procurement of funds for a private corporation subject to unlimited tax liability shall be conditional 
upon that corporation itself having tax -privileged status,  
2. a corporation assigns part of its funds to another tax -privileged corporation or to a legal 
person under public law to be used for tax -privileged purposes,  
3. a corporation assigns its surpluses (income over expenses) from asset management, all or 
part of its gains from economic activities, and a maximum of 15 percent of its other funds destined for 
prompt use under section 55(1) number 5 to another tax -privileg ed corporation or to a legal person Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 25 of 141 under public law for the purpose of asset endowment. The tax -privileged purposes to be achieved 
with the asset yields must be in line with the tax -privileged purposes of the assigning corporation as 
set out in its statut es. The funds assigned under this number and their yields may not be used for the 
further forwarding of funds within the meaning of the first sentence above,  
4. a corporation makes available its workforce to other persons, enterprises, organisations or a 
legal person under public law for tax -privileged purposes,  
5. a corporation makes available premises belonging to it to another tax -privileged corporation 
or to a legal person under public law to be used for tax -privileged purposes,  
6. a foundation uses a p art not exceeding one third of its income for the appropriate upkeep of 
the donor and his or her near relatives, to maintain their graves and to honour their memory,  
7. a corporation holds social events which are of secondary significance in comparison wit h its 
tax-privileged activities,  
8. a sports association promotes paid in addition to unpaid sporting activities,  
9. a foundation set up by a political subdivision makes grants to commercial undertakings to 
achieve its tax -privileged purposes,  
10. a corpor ation uses, in the year of accrual, funds to acquire shareholder rights to maintain 
the percentage share of holdings in incorporated companies. Such acquisition shall reduce the 
amount of reserves pursuant to section 62(1) number 3.  
Section 59  
Precondition s for tax privileges  
Tax privileges shall be granted if it is stated in the statutes, the act of foundation or other articles of 
association (statutes for the purposes of these provisions) the purpose the corporation pursues, that this 
purpose fulfils the requirements of sections 52 to 55 and that it is pursued exclusively and directly; actual 
management activity must conform to these statute provisions.  
Section 60  
Requirements to be met by the statutes  
(1) The purposes set out in the statutes and the means  by which they are to be achieved shall be so 
precisely defined as to ensure that it can be ascertained on the basis of the statutes whether the 
preconditions for tax privileges have been fulfilled. The statutes shall contain the criteria referred to in 
Annex 1.  
(2) The statutes shall conform to the prescribed requirements, in respect of corporation tax and trade tax, 
during the entire assessment period, and, in respect of other taxes, at the time the tax liability arises.  
Section 60a  
Determination of compl iance with statute -related preconditions  
(1) Compliance with statute -related preconditions pursuant to sections 51, 59, 60 and 61 shall be 
determined in a separate process. The determination of statute -related compliance shall be binding with 
regard to the  taxation of the corporation and of taxpayers who give donations to the corporation in the 
form of gifts and membership contributions.  
(2) Determination of statute -related compliance shall be carried out  
1. upon application by the corporation or  
2. as stan dard procedure during assessment of corporation tax if no such determination has 
yet been carried out.  
(3) The binding effect of the determination shall cease from the date the legal provisions upon which the 
determination is based are rescinded or amended . 
(4) In the event that circumstances relevant to the determination change, the determination shall be 
rescinded with effect from the date on which such circumstances change.  
(5) Material errors in the notice of determination of statute -related compliance may be remedied with 
effect from the calendar year following the notification that the determination is to be rescinded. Section 
176 shall apply accordingly, unless changes are to be made for calendar years that commence after the 
promulgation of an author itative ruling by a highest federal court.  
Section 61  
Dedication of assets in the statutes  
(1) A sufficient dedication of assets for tax purposes (section 55(1) number 4) shall be deemed to exist if 
the purpose for which the assets are to be used if the co rporation is dissolved or liquidated or if its former Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 26 of 141 purpose ceases to apply is so precisely defined in the statutes as to ensure that it can be ascertained on 
the basis of the statutes whether such purpose is tax -privileged.  
(2) (rescinded)  
(3) If the pr ovision on the dedication of assets is subsequently amended so that it no longer conforms to 
the requirements of section 55(1) number 4 it shall be deemed from the outset to have been insufficient 
for tax purposes. Section 175(1), first sentence, number 2 shall apply with the proviso that tax 
assessment notices may be issued, cancelled or amended insofar as they relate to taxes which have 
arisen within the ten calendar years preceding the amendment of the provision on the dedication of 
assets.  
Section 62  
Reserves and asset accumulation  
(1) A corporation may al locate all or part of its funds  
1. to a reserve, insofar as this is necessary to sustainably fulfil the tax -privileged purposes set 
out in its statutes;  
2. to a reserve for the intended replacement of f ixed assets that are necessary for achieving 
the tax -privileged purposes set out in its statutes (replacement reserves). The amount of the 
allocation shall be calculated in accordance with the regular depreciation allowances for the fixed 
asset to be repla ced. Evidence shall be provided for conditions justifying higher allocations;  
3. to a general reserve, but this allocation may include no more than one third of its surpluses 
from asset management plus no more than 10 percent of its other funds destined fo r prompt use 
under section 55(1) number 5. If the maximum allocable amount is not allocated to the general 
reserve in a given year, the difference between the amount allocated and the maximum allocable 
amount may be made up over the following two years;  
4. to a reserve for the purpose of acquiring shareholder rights to maintain the percentage 
share of holdings in incorporated companies, although the amount of this reserve shall reduce the 
amount of the reserve under number 3 above.  
(2) The accumulation of r eserves pursuant to subsection (1) above shall take place within the time limit 
stipulated in section 55(1) number 5, third sentence. Reserves under subsection 1 numbers 1, 2 and 4 
above shall be dissolved without delay as soon as the reason for accumulati ng the reserve no longer 
applies. The decommitted funds shall be used within the time limit stipulated in section 55(1) number 5, 
third sentence.  
(3) The following allocations of funds are not subject to the provisions on prompt use under section 55(1) 
number 5:  
1. donations by reason of death if the decedent did not stipulate use for the current 
expenditure of the corporation;  
2. donations which the donor expressly states are to be used to endow the corporation with 
assets or to increase the assets;  
3. donations received in response to an appeal by the corporation if it is evident from the 
appeal that donations are solicited to increase the assets;  
4. donations in kind which by their nature form part of the assets.  
(4) A foundation may transfer to its asset s, in whole or in part in the year of its establishment and in the 
three following calendar years, surpluses from the management of assets and gains from economic 
activities pursuant to section 14.  
Section 63  
Requirements to be met by actual management act ivity 
(1) The actual management of the corporation shall be directed towards the exclusive and direct 
achievement of the tax -privileged purposes and shall conform to the provisions on the requirements for 
tax privileges contained in the statutes.  
(2) Secti on 60(2) shall apply mutatis mutandis  in respect of the actual management activity and section 
61(3) in respect of a breach of the stipulated dedication of assets.  
(3) The corporation shall show by way of orderly records of its revenue and expenditure tha t the actual 
management activity conforms to the provisions of subsection (1) above.  
(4) If the corporation has accumulated funds without meeting the requirements, the tax office may set the 
corporation a time limit for the use of the funds. The actual man agement activity shall be deemed to 
conform with the provisions of subsection (1) above if the corporation uses the funds for tax -privileged 
purposes within such time limit.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 27 of 141 (5) Corporations within the meaning of section 10b(1), second sentence, number 2 o f the Income Tax 
Act may issue donation receipts within the meaning of section 50(1) of the Income Tax Implementing 
Ordinance only if  
1. no more than five years have elapsed since the date on the annex to the corporation tax 
assessment notice or exemption notice or  
2. no more than three years have elapsed since the determination of statute -related 
compliance pursuant to section 60a(1) and no exemption notice or annex to the corporation tax 
assessment notice has yet been issued.  
The time limit shall be calcu lated to the exact date.  
Section 64  
Taxable economic activities  
(1) If the law precludes tax privileges to the extent that an economic activity (section 14) is carried on, 
the corporation shall forfeit the tax privilege for the tax bases (income, turnover,  assets) attributable to 
such economic activity insofar as the economic activity is not a dedicated activity (sections 65 to 68).  
(2) If the corporation carries on several economic activities which are not dedicated activities (sections 
65 to 68), these s hall be treated as a single economic activity.  
(3) Tax bases attributable to economic activities which are not dedicated activities shall not be subject to 
corporation tax and trade tax if the total annual income including VAT from these economic activitie s 
does not exceed 35,000 euros.  
(4) The subdivision of a corporation into several independent corporations for the purpose of benefiting 
more than once from the tax privilege pursuant to subsection (3) above shall constitute an abuse of legal 
options for t ax planning schemes wi thin the meaning of section 42.  
(5) Surpluses subject to corporation tax and trade tax realised from the liquidation of used materials 
obtained free of charge, unless realised by a selling agency permanently maintained for that purpos e, 
may be estimated up to the level of the conventional net profit in the respective branch of business.  
(6) In the case of the following taxable economic activities, taxation may be based on a profit of 15 
percent of income:  
1.  publicity for enterprises undertaken in connection with tax -privileged activity including 
dedicated activities,  
2.  totalisator operations,  
3.  second fractionation stage of the blood donor services.  
Section 65  
Dedicated activity  
A dedicated activity shall be deemed to exist wher e 
1. the overall design of the economic activity is directed towards achieving the tax -privileged 
purposes of the corporation as set out in the statutes,  
2. such purposes can be achieved only by way of such activities, and  
3. the economic activity does not  enter into competition with non -privileged activities of the 
same or similar type to a greater extent than necessary for achieving the tax -privileged purposes.  
Section 66  
Welfare  
(1) A welfare institution shall carry on a dedicated activity if it is espec ially directed towards serving the 
persons designated in section 53.  
(2) Welfare shall be the organised care of distressed or endangered fellow humans undertaken not for 
gain but for the public benefit. Such care may extend to ensuring health, moral, educa tional or economic 
welfare and may serve preventive or remedial purposes.  
(3) A welfare institution shall be especially directed towards serving the persons designated in section 53 
if such persons benefit from at least two thirds of its disbursements and other services. Section 67 shall 
apply in the case of hospitals.  
Section 67  
Hospitals  
(1) A hospital covered by the Hospital Fees Act or the Federal Ordinance on Hospital and Nursing 
Charges shall carry on dedicated activity if not less than 40 percent of hospital days or calculation days 
each year is attributable to patients for whom only rates for general hospital services are charged Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 28 of 141 (section 7 of the Hospital Fees Act, section 10 of the Federal Ordinance on Hospital and Nursing 
Charges).  
(2) A hospital not covered by the Hospital Fees Act or the Federal Ordinance on Hospital and Nursing 
Charges shall carry on dedicated activity if not less than 40 percent of hospital days or calculation days 
each year is attributable to patients for whom no higher charge  for hospital services is made than that 
referred to in subsection (1) above.  
Section 67a  
Sporting events  
(1) Sporting events conducted by a sports association shall constitute dedicated activity if the total 
annual income including VAT does not exceed 45, 000 euros. The sale of food and drinks and the 
publicity measures shall not form part of the sporting events.  
(2) Up to the time at which the corporation tax assessment notice becomes unappealable, the sports 
association may declare to the tax office that it waives the application of the first sentence of subsection 
(1) above. This declaration shall be binding upon the sports association for not less than five assessment 
periods.  
(3) Where the application of the first sentence of subsection (1) above is wai ved, sporting events 
conducted by a sports association shall constitute dedicated activity if  
1. no members of the association taking part receive from the association or from a third party 
remuneration or other benefits for their sporting activity or for the use of their persons, their names, 
their pictures or their sporting activity for publicity purposes apart from an expense allowance, and  
2. no other sportspersons taking part receive from the association or from a third party in 
collaboration with the association remuneration or other benefits for taking part in the event apart 
from an expense allowance.  
Other sporting events shall constitute a taxable economic activity. This shall not preclude tax privileges if 
the remuneration or other benefits are p aid exclusively from economic activities which are not dedicated 
activities, or by third parties.  
Section  68 
Specific dedicated activities  
The following shall also constitute dedicated activities:  
1. 
a) old people’s homes, old people’s residential and nurs ing homes, convalescent homes 
and services for the provision of meals if especially directed towards serving the persons 
designated in section 53 (section 66(3)),  
b) kindergartens, residential homes for children, young persons and students, temporary 
hoste ls for schoolchildren in rural areas and youth hostels,  
2. 
a) agricultural and horticultural undertakings serving to ensure the self -sufficiency of 
corporations and hence the proper nutrition of and adequate provision for institutional 
residents,  
b) other organisations necessary for the self -sufficiency of corporations such as joinery and 
metalworking shops,  
if the supplies and other services provided by such organisations to third parties do not exceed 20 
percent of the total of supplies and other service s provided by the undertaking, including those 
provided to the corporation itself,  
3. 
a) workshops for the disabled which are eligible for aid in accordance with the provisions of 
the Social Code, Book III, and which provide employment for persons who on a ccount of their 
disabilities are unable to obtain work in the general labour market;  
b) organisations providing employment and work therapy where disabled persons undergo 
treatment on account of a doctor’s indication and without having an employment relat ionship 
with the supporting institution of the therapeutic facility in order to rebuild basic physical or 
psychological functions with the aim of reintegrating such persons into everyday life or of Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 29 of 141 developing, advancing and training the specific skills and  abilities necessary for participating 
in working life, and  
c) integrative projects within the meaning of section 132(1) of the Social Code, Book IX, if 
not less than 40 percent of the employees are particularly affected, severely disabled 
persons within the meaning of section 132(1) of the Social Code, Book IX,  
4. organisations maintained to provide welfare for blind people and for physically disabled 
people,  
5.  Day and night facilities (residential care for children and young people) or other forms of 
assisted living,  
6. lotteries and raffles approved by the authorities responsible if the net return is directly and 
exclusively used to advance public -benefit, charitable or religious purposes,  
7. cultural institutions such as museums and theatres and cultu ral events such as concerts 
and art exhibitions; this shall not include the sale of food and drink,  
8. adult education centres and other institutions insofar as they themselves conduct lectures, 
courses and other events of an academic or instructional natu re; this shall also apply to the extent 
that the institutions themselves provide board and accommodation for persons attending such events,  
9. scientific and research institutions whose supporting institution is funded predominantly by 
allocations from the  public sector or from third parties or from asset management. Contract research 
shall also serve science and research purposes. Activities restricted to the application of established 
scientific knowledge, the assumption of project sponsoring and economic  activities not linked to 
research shall no t constitute dedicated activity.  
Four th Chapter  
Liability  
Section 69  
Liability of the representative  
The persons referred to in sections 34 and 35 shall be liable where claims arising from the tax debtor -
creditor relationship (section 37) are not determined or satisfied or not determined or satisfied in time 
due to a breach of the duties imposed on them, wilfully or through gross negligence, or where, as a 
result, tax rebates or refunds are paid in the absence of l egal grounds. This liability shall also include any 
late-payment penalties payable as a result of the breach of duty.  
Section 70  
Liability of the person represented  
(1) Where, in fulfilling their duties, the persons referred to in sections 34 and 35 evade taxes or 
recklessly understate taxes or are involved in tax evasion and, as a result, owe taxes or become liable, 
the persons represented, unless they are tax debtors, shall be liable for the taxes understated due to the 
crime and for the tax advantages wr ongfully granted.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall not apply to crimes committed by legal representatives of individuals if the 
individual’s wealth has not increased as a result of the crime committed by the representative. The same 
shall apply where the per sons represented carefully selected and supervised the person who evaded 
taxes or recklessly understated taxes.  
Section 71  
Liability of tax evaders and persons receiving, holding or selling goods obtained by tax evasion  
Any person who evades taxes or recei ves, holds or sells goods obtained by tax evasion or participates in 
such an act shall be liable for the taxes understated, the tax advantages wrongfully granted, the interest 
due under section 235 and the interest due under section 233a insofar as the lat ter has been credited 
against the interest due on evaded taxes pursuant to section 235(4).  
Section 72  
Liability for breaches of the obligation on the authenticity of accounts  
Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 154(3) wilfully or due to gross neg ligence shall be liable 
to the extent that this contravention is detrimental to the realisation of claims arising from the tax debtor -
creditor relationship.  
Section 72a  
Third -party liability in connection with the transmission of data to revenue authoritie s Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 30 of 141 (1) Producers of programmes as defined in section 87c shall be liable if, due to a breach of their 
obligations under section 87c, data are processed incorrectly or incompletely and, as a result, taxes are 
understated or unwarranted tax benefits are obtai ned. Such liability shall be waived if the producer 
provides evidence that the breach of obligations was not due to gross negligence or intentional 
wrongdoing.  
(2) Any person who, acting in their capacity as contractor (section 87d), uses programmes to pro cess 
data as described in section 87c shall be liable if  
1.  as a result of incorrect or incomplete transmission, taxes are understated or unwarranted 
tax benefits are obtained or  
2.  he breaches his obligations under section 87(2) and, as a result of the data he transmits, 
taxes are understated or unwarranted tax benefits are obtained.  
Such liability shall be waived if the contractor provides evidence that the incorrect or incomplete 
transmission of data or the breach of obligations under section 87(2) was  not due to gross negligence or 
intentional wrongdoing.  
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) shall not apply to recapitulative statements as defined in section 18a(1) of the 
VAT Act.  
(4) Any person who must transmit data to the revenue authorities in accordance wit h section 93c and 
who, acting with intent or gross negligence,  
1. transmits incorrect or incomplete data or  
2. fails to transmit data in violation of his obligations  
shall be liable for the forfeited tax.  
Section 73  
Liabil ity in the case of fiscal unity3 
A controlled company shall be liable for such taxes payable by the controlling company for which their 
fiscal unity is of relevance with regard to tax purposes. Entitlements to the reimbursement of tax rebates 
shall be equivalent to these taxes.  
Footnote 3 : Organschaft , i.e., the German system under which a company with its own legal personality 
(Organgesellschaft ) is controlled by another company ( Organträger ) and dependent upon the latter 
financially, economically and operationally. Both companies are tre ated as one for tax purposes.  
Section 74  
Liability of the owner of objects  
(1) Where objects serving the purposes of an enterprise are not owned by the trader but by a person 
holding a substantial interest in the enterprise, the owner of the objects shall be liable with such objects 
for those taxes payable by the enterprise where tax liability is based on operation of the enterprise. 
However, this liability shall only extend to those taxes which became chargeable while the substantial 
interest existed. Enti tlements to the reimbursement of tax rebates shall be equivalent to these taxes.  
(2) Persons shall be deemed to hold a substantial interest in the enterprise if they directly or indirectly 
hold an interest of more than a quarter of the share or nominal cap ital or of the assets of the enterprise. 
Persons exercising a controlling influence on the enterprise and contributing by their behaviour to the 
non-payment of taxes due within the meaning of the first sentence of subsection (1) above shall also be 
deemed to hold a substantial interest.  
Section 75  
Liability of the acquirer of a business  
(1) Where ownership of an enterprise or a business managed separately within an enterprise structure is 
transferred as a whole, the acquirer shall be liable for taxes where tax liability is based on operation of 
the enterprise, and for withholding taxes, provided that the taxes have arisen after the beginning of the 
last calendar year before the transfer and that they are assessed or declared before expiry of one year 
after r egistration of the business by the acquirer. Liability shall be limited to the assets acquired. 
Entitlements to the reimbursement of tax rebates shall be equivalent to taxes.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall not apply to acquisitions from an insolvency estat e or to acquisitions in 
enforcement proceedings.  
Section 76  
Liability in rem  
(1) Goods liable to excise, import or export duty shall serve as a guarantee for the taxes due on those 
goods (liability in rem ), irrespective of any third -party rights.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 31 of 141 (2) Unles s otherwise stipulated, liability in rem  shall arise for goods subject to excise, import or export 
duty upon their entry into the territory of application of this Code, for goods subject to excise duty also 
upon their production or manufacture.  
(3) As long  as the tax has not been paid, the revenue authority may seize the goods. Seizure of the 
goods may also be effected by prohibiting the person with custody of the goods from disposing of them.  
(4) Liability in rem  shall expire as soon as the tax debt expire s. It shall also expire as soon as the seizure 
is lifted or the goods are released for home use with the consent of the revenue authority.  
(5) The liability in rem  shall not be enforced if the person with power to dispose of the goods has lost 
them, if the  goods subject to excise duty are taken into a manufacturing business or if the goods subject 
to import or export duty are assigned a customs -approved treatment or use.  
Section 77  
Obligation to tolerate  
(1) Whoever is legally obliged to pay a tax out of fu nds they manage shall to this extent be obliged to 
tolerate enforcement against these assets.  
(2) The owner of real property shall tolerate execution against this property on account of a tax based on 
real property as a public charge. Whoever is registered  as owner in the Land  Register shall be deemed 
to be the owner as far as the revenue authority is concerned. The right of the unregistered owner to raise 
the objections against the public charge to which he is entitled shall remain unaffected.  
Third Part  
General rules of procedure  
First Chapter  
Procedural principles  
1st Subchapter  
Participation in the proceedings  
Section 78  
Participants  
Participants shall be  
1. those making and opposing an application,  
2. those to whom the revenue authority intends to direc t or has directed the administrative act,  
3. those with whom the revenue authority intends to conclude or has concluded a contract 
under public law.  
Section 79  
Capacity to act  
(1) The following shall be capable of acting in administrative proceedings:  
1. natural persons capable of contracting under civil law,  
2. natural persons whose capacity to contract is limited under civil law, to the extent that they 
are recognised with regard to the subject matter of the proceedings as being capable of contracting 
under civil law or capable of acting under public law,  
3. legal persons, associations and pools of assets represented by their legal representatives 
or specially appointed individuals,  
4. authorities represented by their heads, or representatives or persons a ppointed by them.  
(2) Where there is a reservation of consent pursuant to section 1903 of the Civil Code regarding the 
subject matter of the proceedings, a person with capacity to contract under the care of a custodian shall 
be deemed capable of acting in administrative proceedings only insofar as he may act, under the 
provisions of civil law, without the consent of the custodian, or he is recognised as being capable of 
acting under the provisions of public law.  
(3) Sections 53 and 55 of the Code of Civil P rocedure shall apply accordingly.  
Section 80  
Authorised representatives and advisers  
(1) A participant may authorise another person to represent him. The authorised representative shall 
have the power to take all actions related to administrative proceedin gs except where the terms of the 
authorisation indicate otherwise; the authorised representative shall not have the power to receive tax 
refunds or tax rebates. The revocation of an authorisation shall not take effect with the revenue Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 32 of 141 authorities until the y receive such revocation; the same shall apply to the modification of an 
authorisation.  
(2) There shall be a presumption that the persons and associations described in section 3 and section 4 
number 11 of the Tax Consultancy Act, who act on behalf of taxp ayers, are properly authorised. For the 
retrieval of data that pertain to the person who granted the authorisation (hereinafter the “principal”) and 
that are stored at a Land  revenue authority, proper authorisation shall be presumed only in accordance 
with the provisions of section 80a(2) and (3).  
(3) Revenue authorities may demand proof of authorisation without cause.  
(4) The death of the principal, a change in the principal’s capacity to act or a change in the principal’s 
legal representation shall not nu llify the authorisation. However, when acting in administrative 
proceedings on behalf of the legal successor, the authorised representative shall upon request furnish 
proof of the successor’s authorisation.  
(5) If a person is appointed to act as authorised  representative in proceedings, he shall be the contact 
person for the revenue authorities. The revenue authorities may contact the actual participant insofar as 
the latter is obliged to cooperate. If the revenue authorities do contact the participant, the  authorised 
representative is to be notified accordingly. Section 122(1), third and fourth sentences, shall apply with 
respect to the disclosure of administrative acts.  
(6) A participant may bring an adviser to negotiations and discussions. Statements by t he adviser shall 
be deemed to have been made by the participant unless the latter states his disagreement without 
undue delay.  
(7) If an authorised representative provides professional assistance in tax matters without having the 
authority to do so, he sha ll be barred from all pending and future administrative proceedings that pertain 
to the principal and that fall under the jurisdiction of the revenue authority. If an authorised representative 
is so barred, both he and the principal shall be notified accor dingly. The revenue authority shall have the 
power to notify other revenue authorities that the authorised representative has been barred.  
(8) An authorised representative may be barred from making a written, electronic or oral submission 
insofar as he is unqualified to do so. This shall not apply to the natural persons specified in section 3 
number 1, section 4 numbers 1 and 2 and section 23(3) of the Tax Consultancy Act or to natural persons 
who work for an agricultural accountancy office ( Land wirtschaftl iche Buchstelle ) and who are authorised 
under section 44 of the Tax Consultancy Act to hold the professional title of “agricultural accountancy 
officer”. If an authorised representative is so barred, both he and the principal shall be notified 
accordingly.  
(9) Advisers who provide professional assistance in tax matters without the authority to do so shall be 
barred from making oral submissions. Furthermore, they may be barred from making oral submissions if 
they are incapable of making or unwilling to make an appropriate submission; the second and third 
sentences of subsection (8) above shall apply accordingly.  
(10) Any actions that authorised representatives or advisers take in administrative proceedings after 
being notified that they have been barred shall  have no effect.  
Section 80a  
Electronic transmission to Land  revenue authorities of data contained in authorisations granting 
powers of representation  
(1) Data contained in authorisations granting powers of representation in tax proceedings and submitted 
using officially prescribed forms may be transmitted, using officially prescribed data sets and via officially 
designated interfaces, to Land  revenue authorities. The data set shall also state whether the principal 
has empowered the authorised representativ e to receive administrative acts on the principal’s behalf or 
to retrieve data stored by the revenue authorities and pertaining to the principal. The transmitted data 
must be commensurate with the authorisation granting powers of representation. If a princ ipal revokes or 
modifies an authorisation that has been transmitted in accordance with the first sentence above, the 
authorised representative must notify the Land  revenue authorities accordingly, without delay, using an 
officially prescribed data set.  
(2) If the data contained in the authorisation are transmitted in accordance with subsection (1) above by 
an authorised representative who is licensed to provide professional assistance in tax matters in 
accordance with section 3 of the Tax Consultancy Act, i t shall be presumed that powers of 
representation have been granted in the scope reported, under the condition that the competent 
chamber confirms that such data are transmitted only by such authorised representatives who have the 
authority to provide prof essional assistance in tax matters. In such cases, the chamber with jurisdiction 
over the authorised representative shall also notify the Land  revenue authorities without delay, using an 
officially prescribed data set, if that person is no longer licensed.  
(3) Subsection (2) above shall apply accordingly to data contained in an authorisation that are 
transmitted by an approved wages tax assistance association ( Lohnsteuerhilfeverein ) as defined in 
section 4 number 11 of the Tax Consultancy Act, as long as th e competent supervisory body, using an 
automated procedure, confirms that the association is approved to provide assistance in tax matters.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 33 of 141 Section 81  
Official appointment of a representative  
(1) If no representative has been appointed, a custodianship cou rt – and in the case of an underage 
participant, a family court – shall, at the request of the revenue authority, appoint a suitable 
representative  
1. for a participant whose identity is unknown,  
2. for an absent participant whose abode is unknown or who i s prevented from looking after 
his affairs,  
3. for participants without abode in  
a) Germany,  
b) another Member State of the European Union, or  
c) another state where the Agreement on the European Economic Area applies,  
if such participants fail to comply w ith the revenue authority’s request to appoint a representative by 
the stipulated deadline,  
4. for a participant who, as a result of mental illness or physical, mental or emotional disability, 
is not capable of taking part personally in the administrative process,  
5. with respect to ownerless items to which the proceedings refer, in order to protect the rights 
and obligations arising in relation to such items.  
(2) Competency over the appointment of the representative shall lie with the custodianship court i n the 
cases referred to in subsection (1) number 4 above and, in the case of a participant not of full age, with 
the family court, in whose district the participant has his habitual abode (section 272(1) number 2 of the 
Act on the Procedure in Family Matte rs and in Matters of Non -Contentious Jurisdiction); in all other 
respects, the competent court shall be that in whose district the revenue authority making the request is 
located.  
(3) The representative shall be entitled to claim from the legal entity of t he revenue authority requesting 
his appointment a reasonable remuneration and refund of his cash outlay. The revenue authority may 
require the person represented to refund its expenses. It shall determine the amount of remuneration 
and ascertain the amount  of expenditure and costs.  
(4) In the cases referred to in subsection (1) number 4 above, the appointment and office of 
representative shall be governed by the provisions on custody; in all other respects, the provisions on 
tutelage shall apply accordingly . 
2nd Subchapter  
Exclusion and rejection of public officials and other persons  
Section 82  
Persons excluded  
(1) The following persons may not act on behalf of a revenue authority in administrative proceedings:  
1. whoever is himself a participant,  
2. whoever  is a relative (section 15) of a participant,  
3. whoever by virtue of a law or authorisation represents a participant in general or in the 
specific administrative proceedings,  
4. whoever is a relative (section 15) of a person who provides assistance in tax  matters to a 
participant in the proceedings,  
5. whoever is employed by a participant and receives remuneration from him, or is active on 
his board of management, supervisory board or similar body; this shall not apply to a person whose 
employing body is a  participant,  
6. whoever, outside his official capacity, has furnished an opinion or other wise been active in 
the matter.  
Anyone who may benefit or suffer a disadvantage directly as a result of the action or the decision shall 
be deemed equal to the partic ipant. This shall not apply when the benefit or disadvantage is based only 
on the fact that someone belongs to an occupational group or segment of the population whose joint 
interests are affected by the matter.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 34 of 141 (2) Whoever is excluded under subsection (1)  above may undertake non -deferrable measures in cases 
of imminent danger.  
(3) Where a member of a committee considers himself to be excluded, or where there is doubt as to 
whether the provisions of subsection (1) above apply, the chairman of the committee shall be informed. 
The committee shall decide on the matter of exclusion. The person concerned shall not participate in the 
decision. The excluded member may not attend further discussions or be present when decisions are 
taken.  
Section 83  
Fear of bias  
(1) Where grounds exist to justify suspicions against the impartiality of the public official, or if a 
participant maintains that such grounds exist, the public official shall inform the head of the authority or 
the person appointed by him and shall at his re quest refrain from participating. Where the fear of bias 
relates to the head of the authority, the supervisory authority shall issue this order to the extent that the 
head of the authority does not refrain from participating of his own accord.  
(2) Section 82(3) shall apply mutatis mutandis  to members of a committee.  
Section 84  
Rejection of members of a committee  
Any participant may reject a member of a committee participating in administrative proceedings who is 
not entitled to take part in the administrati ve proceedings (section 82) or against whom there is a fear of 
bias (section 83). A rejection made before the oral hearing shall be explained in writing or for record. The 
explanation shall not be permissible if the participant has attended the oral hearin g without asserting the 
reason for rejection known to him. The decision on the rejection shall be governed by section 82(3), 
second to fourth sentences. The decision on the motion for rejection may only be contested jointly with 
the decision concluding the  proceedings before the committee.  
3rd Subchapter  
Taxation principles, evidence  
I. General  
Section 85  
Taxation principles  
The revenue authorities shall assess and levy taxes in a uniform manner in accordance with applicable 
laws. In particular, they shall ensure that taxes are not understated, or levied unjustly, or that tax refunds 
and rebates are not granted or denied incorrectly.  
Section 86  
Commencement of proceedings  
The revenue authority shall exercise due discretion in deciding whether and when to com mence 
administrative proceedings. This shall not apply when the revenue authority by law  
1. must act ex officio  or upon application,  
2. may only act upon application and no such application is submitted.  
Section 87  
Official language  
(1) The official langua ge shall be German.  
(2) Where applications are made to a revenue authority in a foreign language, or petitions, records, 
documents, certificates or other documents are filed in a foreign language, the revenue authority may 
require that a translation be pro vided without undue delay. In justified cases, the revenue authority may 
require submission of a notarised translation or a translation by a publicly authorised or sworn interpreter 
or translator. Where the required translation is not furnished without und ue delay, the revenue authority 
may itself arrange for a translation at the expense of the participant. Where the revenue authority has 
availed itself of the services of interpreters or translators, these shall receive remuneration in 
corresponding applica tion of the Judicial Remuneration and Compensation Act.  
(3) Where a notice, application or statement of intent is made with the intention of fixing a period within 
which the revenue authority is to act in a certain manner, and where these are received in a  foreign 
language, the period shall commence only at that point in time at which a translation is available to the 
revenue authority.  
(4) Where a notice, application or statement of intent received in a foreign language is made with the 
intention of fixing  a period for a participant vis -à-vis the revenue authority, of enforcing a claim under 
public law or requiring the fulfilment of an action, the notice, application or statement of intent shall be 
deemed to have been received on the date of their receipt b y the revenue authority, where at the Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 35 of 141 revenue authority’s request a translation is provided within a suitable period to be fixed by the revenue 
authority. Otherwise, the moment of receipt of the translation shall be deemed definitive, unless 
international agreements provide otherwise. Reference shall be made to such legal consequence when 
the period is being fixed.  
Section 87a  
Electronic communication  
(1) The transmission of electronic documents shall be permissible insofar as the recipient provides this 
possibility. An electronic document shall be deemed as having been received as soon as the intended 
receiving entity has recorded it in a format which is capable of being processed by the addressee; 
section 122(2a), section 122a and section 123, second and t hird sentences, shall remain unaffected. If 
the revenue authority transmits data that are subject to tax secrecy, the data shall be encrypted using an 
appropriate method. Temporary automated decryption that is performed by an accredited service 
provider du ring the transmission of a DE -Mail message for the purpose of checking for malware and for 
the purpose of forwarding the data to the addressee of the DE -Mail message does not violate the 
encryption requirement under the third sentence above. Electronic not ifications stating that data are 
available for retrieval or that electronically transmitted data have been received by the revenue 
authorities may be sent unencrypted.  
(2) Where an electronic document transmitted to the revenue authority is not suitable fo r processing by 
it, the revenue authority shall inform the sender without undue delay, stating the technical specifications 
that apply. Where a recipient claims that he is unable to process the electronic document transmitted by 
the revenue authority, the revenue authority shall resend it to him in a suitable electronic format or as a 
written document.  
(3) Where it is stipulated by law that applications, declarations or notifications to the revenue authorities 
must be submitted in writing, such written comm unication may be replaced with electronic 
communication unless otherwise required by law. To qualify as electronic, it shall suffice for an electronic 
document to bear a qualified electronic signature. When signing, a person may use a pseudonym only if 
that person provides evidence of his or her identity to the revenue authorities. Written communication 
may also be replaced with  
1. the direct submission of a declaration using an electronic form that the authorities make 
available via an input device or via publicly accessible networks;  
2. the transmission of an electronic document to the authorities using the method of 
transmission specified in section 5(5) of the DE -Mail Act.  
In cases under the fourth sentence number 1, input via publicly accessible network s shall take place 
using a secure proof of identity pursuant to section 18 of the Identity Card Act or section 78(5) of the 
Residence Act.  
(4) Where it is stipulated by law that administrative acts or other measures of the revenue authorities 
must be in wr iting, such written communication may be replaced with electronic communication unless 
otherwise required by law. To qualify as electronic, it shall suffice for an electronic document to bear a 
qualified electronic signature. Written communication may also  be replaced with the transmission of a 
DE-Mail message in accordance with section 5(5) of the DE -Mail Act where the confirmation by the 
accredited service provider indicates that the issuing revenue authority is the user of the DE -Mail 
account. For transc ripts that must be recorded in writing by revenue authorities, the first and third 
sentences above shall apply only where expressly permitted by law.  
(5) If an electronic document constitutes an item of evidence, the evidence shall be deemed supplied 
once the file has been submitted or transmitted; if neither the taxpayer nor the revenue authority is in 
possession of the file, section 97 shall apply accordingly. Section 371a of the Code of Civil Procedure 
shall apply accordingly with regard to the probative  value of electronic documents.  
(6) Unless otherwise specified, electronic transmissions of officially prescribed data sets to revenue 
authorities shall be done using a secure method that authenticates the sender of the data and 
guarantees the confidential ity and integrity of the data set. If, for purposes of authentication, the sender 
of the data uses electronic identity verification in accordance with section 18 of the Identity Card Act or 
section 78(5) of the Residence Act, the data necessary for this pu rpose may be stored and used 
together with the other transmitted data.  
(7) If an electronic administrative act is sent to the recipient in accordance with section 122(2a), a secure 
method shall be used that authenticates the transmitting office or entity w ithin the revenue administration 
and that guarantees the confidentiality and integrity of the data set. A method shall be deemed secure if, 
in particular, the administrative act  
1.  bears a qualified electronic signature and is encrypted using an appropria te method or  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 36 of 141 2.  is sent via a DE -Mail message in accordance with section 5(5) of the DE -Mail Act where the 
confirmation by the accredited service provider indicates that the issuing revenue authority is the user 
of the DE -Mail account.  
(8) If an electroni c administrative act is made available for retrieval in accordance with section 122a, a 
secure method shall be used that authenticates the revenue administration office or entity responsible for 
making the data available and that guarantees the confidentia lity and integrity of the data set. The 
person who is authorised to retrieve the data shall authenticate himself. The second sentence of 
subsection (6) shall apply accordingly.  
Section 87b  
Conditions for transmitting data to revenue authorities via electro nic means  
(1) In consultation with the highest revenue authorities of the Länder , the Federal Ministry of Finance 
may make specifications pertaining to data sets as well as to further technical details in connection with 
the electronic transmission of tax returns, documents accompanying tax returns, data contained in 
authorisations as per section 80a, data as defined in section 93c and other data that need to be provided 
for the taxation procedure using officially prescribed data sets. It shall not be neces sary for the Federal 
Ministry of Finance to consult with the highest revenue authorities of the Länder  if the data are 
transmitted solely to federal revenue authorities.  
(2) Persons who electronically transmit officially prescribed data sets to revenue aut horities shall make 
proper use of the interfaces officially designated for this purpose for the relevant tax period or tax date in 
accordance with subsection (1) above. The officially designated interfaces will be made available on the 
internet.  
(3) For pr ocedures that are conducted via the central agency as defined in section 81 of the Income Tax 
Act, the Federal Ministry of Finance may issue ordinances with the consent of the Bundesrat that lay 
down basic data transmission rules and that specify who is re sponsible for enforcing claims notices. 
Rules may be specified in particular for the following:  
1.  the process for identifying participants in the procedures,  
2.  details regarding the form, content, processing and storage of the data to be transmitted,  
3.  the method of data transmission,  
4.  the obligations of third parties to cooperate and  
5.  the testing of procedures.  
In setting rules on the transmission of data, ordinances may make reference to publications by expert 
bodies. In such cases, the date o f publication, the reference source and an official location where the 
publication is securely archived shall be indicated.  
Section 87c  
Use of unofficial data processing programmes in taxation procedures  
(1) If unofficial data processing programmes are uti lised in taxation procedures for the purpose of 
processing data, such programmes must ensure the correct and complete processing of such data within 
the scope of the programme size specified in the programme description.  
(2) The size of a programme, toget her with a description of exceptional cases where the programme 
cannot process data correctly and completely, must be indicated prominently in programme descriptions.  
(3) Before programmes are approved for operative use, and following each modification app roved for 
operative use, manufacturers must test the programmes to determine whether they fulfil the 
requirements specified in subsection (1) above. As part of this process, a protocol of the most recently 
conducted test and a programme listing must be pro duced, and then retained for a period of five years. 
The retention period stipulated in the second sentence above shall begin with the expiration of the 
calendar year when the programme was first approved for operative use; in the case of modifications to 
a programme already approved for operative use, the retention period shall begin no earlier than the 
expiration of the calendar year when the modification was first approved for operative use. Electronic, 
magnetic or optical storage methods that enable the  programme version currently in use to be 
reproduced in printed form at any time shall be equivalent to a programme listing.  
(4) Revenue authorities have the right to review programmes and documentation. The obligations of 
taxpayers to cooperate pursuant t o section 200 shall apply accordingly. In the event of a defective 
programme, revenue authorities shall contact the manufacturer or distributor without delay to request 
repair or replacement. If repair or replacement is not carried out without delay, reven ue authorities shall 
have the right to ban the manufacturer’s programmes from being used for the electronic transmission of 
data to revenue authorities. Revenue authorities shall not be obligated to test programmes. Section 30 
shall apply accordingly.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 37 of 141 (5) If a programme is intended for general sales and distribution, the manufacturer shall, upon request, 
provide revenue authorities with samples for the purpose of testing in accordance with subsection (4) 
above.  
(6) The obligations of programme manufacturers  under the foregoing provisions shall be based 
exclusively in public law.  
Section 87d  
Third -party transmission of data to revenue authorities  
(1) Third parties (contractors) may be commissioned with transmitting to revenue authorities, for tax 
purposes, da ta that must be submitted using officially prescribed data sets and officially designated 
interfaces via remote data transmission, or data that are submitted voluntarily.  
(2) Before transmitting the data, contractors must verify the identity and address of  the contracting party 
(identification) and record the relevant information in suitable form. If a contractor has already identified 
the contracting party on a previous occasion and recorded the relevant information, he does not need to 
repeat the identifi cation process unless external circumstances cause him to doubt whether the 
information gathered previously to identify the contracting party is still correct. Contractors shall ensure 
that they are able at any time to provide information on the identity o f the party that commissioned the 
transmission of data. The information recorded pursuant to the first sentence above shall be retained for 
a period of five years; the retention period shall begin with the expiration of the year when the most 
recent transm ission of data was carried out. The obligation to be ready to provide information under the 
third sentence above shall expire with the end of the retention period under the fourth sentence above.  
(3) Contractors shall present the data, in a form that can b e easily checked, to contracting parties for 
approval. Contracting parties shall check without delay whether the data presented to them by 
contractors are complete and correct.  
Section 87e  
Exceptions for import and export duties, excise duties and aviation  tax 
Unless otherwise specified, section 72a and sections 87b to 87d shall not apply to import and export 
duties, excise duties and aviation tax.  
Section 88  
Principle of investigation  
(1) The revenue authorities shall investigate the facts of a case by vir tue of office. In doing so, they shall 
take all relevant circumstances into account, including those that are favourable to the participants.  
(2) The revenue authorities shall determine the type and scope of investigations based on the 
circumstances of eac h individual case and based on the principles of consistency, lawfulness and 
proportionality; they shall not be bound by motions for the submission of evidence or by submissions 
made by the participants. Decisions on the type and scope of investigations ma y take the general 
experience of revenue authorities, as well as cost -effectiveness and expedience, into account.  
(3) To ensure the timely and consistent execution of tax laws, the highest revenue authorities may, for 
identified or identifiable categories of cases, issue instructions on the type and scope of investigations 
and the processing of data collected or recorded, unless otherwise required by law. Such instructions 
may take the general experience of revenue authorities, as well as cost -effectiveness  and expedience, 
into account. Such instructions may not be made public if doing so could jeopardise the consistency and 
lawfulness of taxation. Instructions by the highest Land  revenue authorities in accordance with the first 
sentence above shall require the agreement of the Federal Ministry of Finance if the Land  revenue 
authorities administer taxes on behalf of the Federation.  
(4) When they receive data meant for forwarding to Land  revenue authorities, both the Federal Central 
Tax Office and the central agency as defined in section 81 of the Income Tax Act may refrain from 
forwarding such data to the Land  revenue authorities if attributing or assigning the data to a specific 
taxpayer or tax office is impossible or requires unreasonable effort. Data attrib uted or assigned to a 
specific taxpayer or tax office in accordance with the first sentence above shall be forwarded to the 
Länder , taking into account any instructions issued by the Federal Ministry of Finance in accordance with 
subsection (3) above. Data  not forwarded to Land  revenue authorities shall be stored by the Federal 
Central Tax Office for the purpose of proceedings described in section 30(2) numbers 1a) and 1b), until 
the expiration of the 15th year following the year when the data were received . Data stored in 
accordance with the third sentence above may be processed only for use in proceedings described in 
section 30(2) numbers 1a) and 1b) and for purposes of monitoring data protection.  
(5) Revenue authorities may use automated systems (risk ma nagement systems) to gauge whether 
further investigations and reviews are necessary to ensure the consistent and lawful assessment of 
taxes and tax rebates and the consistent and lawful crediting of withheld taxes and prepayments. The 
principle of cost -effective administration should be taken into account here. At a minimum, risk 
management systems must ensure that:  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 38 of 141 1.  a sufficient number of cases are selected, on the basis of random selection, for 
comprehensive review by officials,  
2.  officials review th ose cases sorted out as requiring review,  
3.  officials are able to select cases for comprehensive review,  
4.  regular reviews are conducted to determine whether risk management systems are fulfilling 
their objectives.  
The details of risk management system s must not be made public if doing so could jeopardise the 
consistency and lawfulness of taxation. For taxes administered by Land  revenue authorities on behalf of 
the Federation, the highest Land  revenue authorities shall, in consultation with the Federal Ministry of 
Finance, specify the details of risk management systems with a view towards ensuring that the execution 
of tax laws is consistent on a nationwide basis.  
Section 88a  
Collection of protected data  
To the extent required to ensure the uniform asses sment and levying of taxes, the revenue authorities 
may process data protected under section 30 in filing systems, including for future 
procedures/proceedings as described in section 30(2) numbers 1a and 1b, in particular to obtain 
comparable values. Proce ssing of the data shall be permissible only for procedures/proceedings as 
described in section 30(2) numbers 1a and 1b.  
Section 88b  
Nationwide retrieval and use of data to prevent, investigate and prosecute understatements of 
tax 
(1) Data stored by revenue  authorities for the purpose of conducting administrative proceedings in tax 
matters, criminal proceedings for tax crimes or administrative proceedings for tax -related administrative 
offences may be made available for reciprocal retrieval and then, in orde r to prevent, investigate or 
prosecute  
1. understatements of tax across more than one Land , 
2. understatements of tax with international ramifications, or  
3. understatements of tax with significant ramifications,  
reciprocally retrieved, reviewed via automa ted data cross -checking, used and stored, even if such data 
are protected under section 30.  
(2) The findings of data analyses under subsection (1) above shall be made available electronically to 
the relevant competent revenue authorities.  
(3) The respectiv e competent Land  government shall stipulate by way of ordinance which Land  revenue 
authorities are responsible for the activities referred to in subsections (1) and (2) above. The Land  
government may issue an ordinance delegating this duty to the highest Land authority responsible for 
the revenue administration.  
Section 89  
Advice, information  
(1) The revenue authority shall solicit the filing of statements, the submission of applications or the 
correction of statements or applications when it is clear that these were not filed or submitted, or filed or 
submitted incorrectly, due to an error or a lack of knowledge. It shall, where necessary, furnish 
information regarding the rights and duties of participants in the administrative proceedings.  
(2) Tax offices and the Federal Central Tax Office may upon request provide advance rulings on the tax 
treatment of precisely defined, as yet unrealised circumstances if this is of particular interest due to the 
existence of significant tax implications. The revenue autho rity that would have local jurisdiction if the 
underlying circumstances specified in the request were to be realised shall be responsible for issuing an 
advance ruling. Where no revenue authority has jurisdiction under sections 18 to 21 for the applicant a t 
the time the request is filed, jurisdiction shall lie with the Federal Central Tax Office for taxes 
administered by Land  revenue authorities on behalf of the Federation, notwithstanding the second 
sentence above; in such cases, an advance ruling shall al so bind the revenue authority that has 
jurisdiction upon realisation of the underlying circumstances specified in the ruling. The competent 
revenue authority should make a decision on a request for an advance ruling within six months after the 
request is r eceived; if the revenue authority cannot make a decision on a request by this deadline, it shall 
notify the applicant accordingly, stating its reasons. The Federal Ministry of Finance shall be authorised 
to stipulate, by way of ordinances issued with the c onsent of the Bundesrat, more detailed provisions on 
the form, content and conditions of requests for advance rulings, and on the scope of the binding effect Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 39 of 141 of such rulings. Ordinances may also specify the conditions under which single advance rulings are  to be 
issued that apply to multiple participants and which revenue authority is responsible for issuing advance 
rulings in such cases. Such ordinances above shall not require the consent of the Bundesrat where they 
concern insurance tax.  
(3) A fee shall b e charged for processing requests for advance rulings in accordance with subsection (2) 
above. In cases where a single advance ruling is issued that applies to multiple applicants, only one fee 
shall be charged; in such cases, all applicants are jointly li able for the fee. The fee shall be payable by 
the applicant within one month following notification that the fee has been set. The revenue authority 
may delay its decision on an application until the fee has been paid.  
(4) Fees shall be calculated on the b asis of the value the advance ruling represents for the applicant 
(object value). The applicant should state the object value and the circumstances relevant to its 
determination in his application for advance ruling. Fees are to be calculated by the revenu e authority on 
the basis of the object value as declared by the applicant insofar as this does not lead to an obviously 
incorrect resultant amount. Where the value of the object cannot be determined even by way of estimate, 
a time related fee shall be char ged; this shall be 50 euros per half hour or portion thereof, the minimum 
charge being 100 euros.  
(5) In corresponding application of section 34 of the Court Fees Act, the fee shall be levied at a rate of 
1.0 percent. Section 39(2) of the Court Fees Act sh all apply accordingly. If the object value is less than 
10,000 euros, no fee shall be levied.  
(6) If the object value is not determinable and cannot be determined by way of estimate, a time -related 
fee shall be charged; this shall be 50 euros for each half  hour of processing time or portion thereof. If the 
processing time is less than two hours, no fee shall be levied.  
(7) The fee may be waived in full or in part where its collection would be unreasonable in individual 
cases. In particular, the fee may be r educed where an application for advance ruling is withdrawn before 
the revenue authority’s decision is issued.  
Section 90  
Obligation of participants to cooperate  
(1) Participants shall be obliged to cooperate with the authorities in establishing the facts of the case. 
They shall discharge this obligation in particular by the full and truthful disclosure of the facts relevant for 
taxation and by indicating any evidence known to them. The extent of this obligation shall be determined 
by the circumstances of t he individual case.  
(2) Where circumstances relating to transactions effected outside the territory of application of this Code 
are to be established and subjected to the provisions of tax law, the participants shall clarify these 
circumstances and procure  the necessary evidence. In doing so, they shall exhaust all legal and 
practical means available to them. Where there are objectively recognisable indications to assume that 
the taxpayer has business relations with financial institutions in a state or terr itory with which there is no 
agreement to provide information in accordance with Article 26 of the OECD Model Tax Convention on 
Income and on Capital in the version of 2005, or the state or the territory does not provide information to 
a comparable extent or is not willing to engage in a corresponding provision of information, the taxpayer 
shall at the revenue authority’s request make a sworn statement affirming the correctness and 
completeness of the details provided by him and authorise the revenue author ity to assert on his behalf, 
both in and out of court, the possible entitlement to information against the credit institutions named by 
the revenue authority; the sworn statement may not be compelled pursuant to section 328. A participant 
may not plead ina bility to clarify circumstances or to submit evidence when he, depending on the case, 
could, in structuring his circumstances, have afforded himself or have himself given the opportunity to do 
so. 
(3) Taxpayers shall keep records on the nature and content of their business relations that fall under the 
definition provided under section 1 subsection (4) of the External Tax Relations Act. The obligation to 
keep records shall encompass business transactions (documentation of facts); the economic and legal 
aspe cts of any arm’s length agreement on terms of business, especially prices (transfer prices); and 
information on when the transfer prices were set, which transfer pricing method was used, and which 
comparability data were used (documentation of commensurate ness). If a taxpayer is required to keep 
records as described in the first sentence above for an enterprise that forms part of a multinational 
enterprise group, such records shall include an overview of the type of business activities conducted by 
the ente rprise group and of the transfer pricing method used by the group, unless the enterprise’s 
revenue in the previous financial year totalled less than 100 million euros. A multinational enterprise 
group is any group comprised of at least two enterprises that  are related within the meaning of section 1 
subsection (2) of the External Tax Relations Act and that are resident in different countries, or any group 
comprised of at least one enterprise with at least one permanent establishment in another country. 
Reve nue authorities should require the submission of records only for the purpose of conducting an 
external audit. Such submissions shall be governed by section 97. Submissions shall be made on 
request within a period of 60 days. Records of exceptional busines s transactions shall be compiled as Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 40 of 141 soon as possible and submitted within a period of 30 days upon request by the revenue authorities. The 
period for submission stipulated in the seventh and eighth sentences above may be extended in duly 
justified individu al cases. Additional records shall be submitted upon request by the revenue authorities. 
In order to ensure the uniform application of the law, the Federal Ministry of Finance shall be authorised 
to stipulate, by way of ordinances issued with the consent o f the Bundesrat, the type, content and extent 
of the records to be kept.  
Section 91  
Participant consultation  
(1) Before an administrative act affecting the rights of a participant may be issued, he should be given 
the opportunity to comment on the facts re levant to the decision. This shall apply particularly where there 
is to be a significant departure from the facts declared in the tax return to the detriment of the taxpayer.  
(2) The consultation may be dispensed with when not required by the circumstances  of an individual 
case, in particular when  
1. an immediate decision appears necessary because of imminent danger or in the public 
interest,  
2. such consultation would jeopardise the observance of a time limit material to the decision,  
3. there is not to be a divergence to a participant’s disadvantage from the actual details he 
provided in an application or statement,  
4. the revenue authority intends to issue a general order or similar administrative acts in large 
numbers or administrative acts using autom ated systems,  
5. measures of enforcement are to be taken.  
(3) The consultation shall not take place if it conflicts with an overriding public interest.  
Section 92  
Evidence  
Exercising due discretion, the revenue authority shall use such evidence as it deems  necessary to 
ascertain the facts of the case. In particular it may  
1. gather information of all kinds from the participants and other persons,  
2. consult experts,  
3. procure certificates and files,  
4. carry out inspections.  
II. Evidence through informati on and expert opinion  
Section 93  
Obligation of the participants and other  persons to provide information  
(1) The participants and other persons shall provide the revenue authority with the information needed to 
ascertain facts which are of significance for  taxation. This shall also apply to associations without legal 
capacity, pools of assets, authorities and commercial enterprises of public -law entities. Persons other 
than the participants should be required to provide information only if clarification of the matter by the 
participants does not or is not likely to produce any results.  
(1a) Revenue authorities may issue to persons other than the participants information requests 
pertaining to an as yet unknown quantity of facts and circumstances involving pe rsons who are 
identifiable in principle but not yet known to the revenue authorities (batch information requests). The 
preconditions for issuing a batch information request are (a) there must be sufficient grounds for 
conducting an investigation and (b) ot her feasible fact -finding measures are unlikely to produce results. 
The third sentence of subsection (1) above shall not apply.  
(2) Information requests shall specify which information is to be provided and whether the information is 
required for the taxa tion of the person obliged to provide information or for the taxation of other persons. 
Information requests shall be issued in writing if the person obliged to provide information so requests.  
(3) Information shall be provided truthfully and to the best o f the knowledge and belief of the person 
obliged to provide information. Persons obliged to provide information who are unable to do so from 
memory shall consult the accounts, records, business documents and other documentation available to 
them and shall where necessary take notes from such documentation.  
(4) The person obliged to provide information may do so in writing, electronically, orally or by telephone. 
The revenue authority may require information to be provided in writing if this is expedient for  the matter 
in question.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 41 of 141 (5) The revenue authority may stipulate that the person obliged to provide information does so on official 
premises in the form of an oral statement. They shall be entitled to do so in particular if information in 
writing has been demanded but not provided or if information provided in writing has not served to clarify 
the matter. The first sentence of subsection (2) above shall apply accordingly.  
(6) Upon application by the person obliged to provide information, a written record sh all be prepared of 
the oral statement made on official premises. This record shall include the names of persons present, 
the place, the date and the essential content of the information. It should be signed by the public official 
to whom the oral statement  is made and by the person obliged to provide information. A copy of the 
record shall be supplied to the participants.  
(7) The automated retrieval of account information in accordance with section 93b shall be permissible 
only insofar as  
1. the taxpayer ap plies for a tax assessment pursuant to section 32d(6) of the Income Tax Act, 
or 
2. (rescinded)  
and the retrieval in these cases is necessary for the assessmen t of income tax or is necessary  
3. for determining income pursuant to sections 20 and 23(1) of the  Income Tax Act in 
assessment periods up to and including 2008, or  
4. for levying taxes regulated by federal law or for reclaiming tax refunds or tax rebates 
regulated by federal law or  
4a.  for identifying cases in which domestic taxpayers (as defined in the first sentence of section 
138(2)) are authorised to dispose of, or are beneficial owners (as defined in the Money Laundering 
Act) of, an account held by a natural person, partnership, corporation, association or pool of assets 
whose residence, habitual  abode, place of management, main establishment or registered office is 
located outside the jurisdiction of this code,  or 
4b.  for determining tax bases in cases where section 208(1), first sentence, number 3 applies  
or 
5. the taxpayer consents.  
In these c ases, the revenue authority or, in cases where section 1(2) applies, the municipality may 
submit a request to the Federal Central Tax Office asking it to retrieve from credit institutions data items 
contained in the filing systems that are to be maintained  under section 93b(1) and (1a); in cases where 
numbers 1 to 4b of the first sentence above apply, a request for retrieval may be made only if an 
information request issued to the taxpayer did not or is unlikely to produce results.  
(8) Upon request, the Fed eral Central Tax Office shall provide information on the data specified in 
section 93b(1)  
1.  to the authorities responsible for administering  
a) the basic allowance for jobseekers under Book II of the Social Code,  
b) social assistance under Book XII of th e Social Code,  
c) educational and training assistance under the Federal Education and Training 
Assistance Act,  
d) career advancement training assistance under the Upgrading Training Assistance Act 
and 
e) housing benefit under the Housing Benefit Act  
insofa r as this is necessary to verify fulfilment of eligibility conditions and a previous information 
request issued to the parties concerned did not or is unlikely to produce results.  
2.  to the police authorities of the Federation and the Länder , insofar as t his is necessary to 
avert a significant threat to public security, and  
3.  to Land  authorities responsible for the protection of the constitution, insofar as this is 
necessary in order for such authorities to perform their functions and is expressly permit ted by Land  
legislation.  
In order to carry out enforcement, the authorities responsible for enforcement under the Federal 
Administrative Enforcement Act and the administrative enforcement acts of the Länder  may submit a Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 42 of 141 request to the Federal Central Tax O ffice asking it to retrieve from credit institutions the data specified in 
section 93b(1) if  
1.  the judgement debtor fails to comply with the obligation to file an asset disclosure or  
2.  the recovery of assets listed in the asset disclosure is unlikely t o satisfy the claim that was 
the basis for demanding such asset disclosure.  
Requests asking the Federal Central Tax Office to retrieve data specified in section 93b(1) for other 
purposes shall be permissible only to the extent that this is expressly permi tted by federal law.  
(9) Before a request for retrieval under subsections (7) or (8) above is submitted, the person concerned 
shall be instructed of the possibility that account data may be retrieved; this may also be done by 
including an explicit statemen t to this effect on official forms and in guidance notes. After the account 
data have been retrieved, the requesting party shall notify the person concerned that the retrieval has 
been conducted. Instructions under the first half -sentence of the first sent ence above and notifications 
under the second sentence above shall not be provided insofar as the conditions specified in section 
32b(1) apply or insofar as it is barred by law to inform the person concerned. Section 32c(5) shall apply 
accordingly. Unless otherwise required by law, the fourth sentence above shall apply in cases where 
subsection (8) applies. The first and second sentences above shall not apply to the cases referred to in 
subsection (8), first sentence, number 2 or 3 above or insofar as this is expressly stipulated by federal 
law. 
(10) A request for retrieval under subsections (7) or (8) above and the result thereof shall be 
documented by the requesting party.  
Section 93a  
General obligation to disclose information  
(1) To ensure taxation in acc ordance with section 85, the Federal Government may, by way of 
ordinances issued with the consent of the Bundesrat, require authorities, other public entities and public 
service broadcasters  
1.  to inform revenue authorities of the following:  
a) the recipi ent of payments made, together with the legal basis and the amount and timing 
of such payments,  
b) administrative acts that result in a denial or reduction of tax privileges for the persons 
affected or permit the persons affected to realise taxable income,  
c) subsidies and similar support measures provided, and  
d) indications of undeclared work, the unauthorised supply of temporary workers or the 
unauthorised employment of non -nationals;  
2.  to notify recipients under number 1a) above of the total amount of  annual payments made 
and of  the revenue authorities’ opinion regarding the tax liabilities thus incurred.  
Ordinances may also specify the extent to which notifications can or must be transmitted in accordance 
with section 93c; in such cases, section 72a(4 ) shall not apply. The obligations of authorities, other public 
entities and public service broadcasters regarding notifications, information, reporting and mutual 
assistance, as stipulated in other provisions, shall remain unaffected.  
(2) Debt administrat ions, credit institutions, commercial enterprises of legal persons under public law 
within the meaning of the Corporation Tax Act, public joint ventures without sovereign jurisdiction, 
professional chambers and insurance companies shall be exempt from the obligation to disclose 
information.  
(3) Such ordinances shall define more precisely the entities providing the information, the obligation to 
notify the persons concerned, the information to be provided and the revenue authorities responsible for 
receiving  the communication and shall stipulate the scope, timing and procedure of the communication. 
Such ordinances may provide for exceptions to the obligation to disclose information, in particular in 
cases of minor tax importance.  
Section 93b  
Automated retriev al of account information  
(1) The filing systems that credit institutions are required to maintain under section 24c(1) of the Banking 
Act must also be maintained for retrievals in accordance with section 93(7) and (8).  
(1a) For the purpose of responding to requests for the retrieval of account data under section 93(7) or 
(8), credit institutions must store the data specified in section 24c(1) of the Banking Act and, for each 
person with power of disposal and each beneficial owner as defined in the Money L aundering Act, the Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 43 of 141 address and the data specified in section 154(2a). Section 154(2d) and Article 97 paragraph 26(5) 
numbers 3 and 4 of the Introductory Act to the Fiscal Code shall remain unaffected.  
(2) Upon request in cases where section 93(7) and (8) a pply, the Federal Central Tax Office may, using 
automated procedures, retrieve from credit institutions data items contained in the filing systems that are 
to be maintained under subsections (1) and (1a) above and transmit such data to the requesting party . 
The Federal Central Tax Office may disclose the identification number (as defined in section 139b) of a 
person with power of disposal or a beneficial own er only to revenue authorities.  
Section 93c  
Transmission of data by third parties  
(1) If legal provis ions stipulate that a taxpayer’s tax data are to be transmitted electronically to revenue 
authorities by a third party (notifying entity), the following shall apply, subject to any contrary provisions 
contained in tax legislation:  
1.  Following the end of the tax period, the notifying entity must transmit the data, using 
officially  prescribed data sets and officially designated interfaces via remote transmission, by the last 
day of February in the following year; if the requirement to submit data is related  to a specific tax 
date, the data must be transmitted by the end of the second calendar month following the end of the 
month in which the tax date fell.  
2.  The data set must contain the following information:  
a) the name, address, reference code and conta ct details of the notifying entity, as well as 
its identifier pursuant to sections 139a to 139c or, if such identifier has not been issued, its 
tax number;  
b) if the notifying entity has commissioned a contractor as described in section 87d to 
transmit the  data, then, in addition to the information under number 2a above, the 
contractor’s name, address, contact details and identifier pursuant to sections 139a to 139c 
or, if such identifier has not been issued, tax number must be provided;  
c) the taxpayer’s f irst and last name, date of birth, address and identification number under 
section 139b;  
d) if the taxpayer is not a natural person, then its name or trade name, address and 
business identification number under 139c or, if such identification number has no t been 
issued, tax number must be provided;  
e) the date and time when the data set was created or another event that allows the 
chronological order to be identified, the type of notification being submitted, the relevant tax 
period or tax date, and the ind ication as to whether the transmitted data set constitutes a 
first-time, corrected or cancelling notification.  
3.  The notifying entity shall let the taxpayer know which of his tax -relevant data it has 
transmitted or will transmit to the revenue authoritie s. This information shall be furnished in a suitable 
manner – electronically, if so approved by the taxpayer – and within a reasonable period of time. 
Obligations to furnish information pursuant to other legislation shall remain unaffected.  
4.  The notify ing entity shall record the transmitted data and retain these records, together with 
the documents used as the basis of the data transmission, until the expiration of the seventh calendar 
year following the tax period or tax date; sections 146 and 147(2), (5) and (6) shall apply accordingly.  
(2) If, after the expiration of the seventh calendar year following the tax period or tax date, the notifying 
entity discovers that the submission of certain data was obligatory, it should not transmit that data.  
(3) If, prior to the expiration of the seventh calendar year following the tax period or tax date, the notifying 
entity discovers that  
1.  the data transmitted in accordance with subsection (1) above were incorrect or  
2.  a data set was transmitted even though it did not fulfil the criteria for transmission,  
then the notifying entity shall correct or cancel the transmission without delay by submitting another data 
set, subject to any contrary provisions contained in tax legislation. Subsection (1) numbers 2 to 4  above 
shall apply accordingly.  
(4) The revenue authority with jurisdiction pursuant to tax legislation may review whether the notifying 
entity has  
1.  satisfied its obligations under subsection (1) numbers 1, 2 and 4 and subsection (3) above 
and Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 44 of 141 2.  deter mined the content of the data set in accordance with the provisions of the relevant tax 
legislation.  
The rights and obligations of the revenue authority responsible for assessing the taxpayer’s taxes, as 
such rights and obligations pertain to determining t he facts of a case, shall remain unaffected.  
(5) Unless otherwise required by law, the revenue authority responsible for receiving the data pursuant 
to applicable tax legislation shall also be responsible for applying subsection (4) above and section 
72a(4 ). 
(6) Revenue authorities may process the data referred to in subsections (1) and (3) above and 
transmitted to them by notifying entities if such processing is necessary in order for the revenue 
authorities to fulfil the functions incumbent upon them or t o exercise the official authority with which they 
have been vested.  
(7) Unless otherwise required by law, taxpayer data obtained and stored by the notifying entity 
exclusively for the purpose of transmitting them to revenue authorities may be used by the n otifying 
entity solely for that purpose.  
(8) Subsections (1) to (7) above shall not apply to  
1.  obligations to transmit data pursuant to section 51a(2c) or chapter XI of the Income Tax Act,  
2.  obligations to transmit data to the customs authorities,  
3.  transmissions of data between revenue authorities and   
4.  obligations to transmit data to foreign public authorities.  
Section 93d  
Authorisation to issue ordinances  
The Federal Ministry of Finance may stipulate, by way of ordinances issued with the consent  of the 
Bundesrat, that data as described in section 93c shall be collected for purposes of testing prior to the 
initial transmission, insofar as this is necessary in order to develop, review or modify automated 
procedures. In such cases, the data may be p rocessed exclusively for purposes of testing and must be 
deleted within one year after the conclusion of such testing.  
Section 94  
Examination under oath  
(1) Where the revenue authority considers it advisable in view of the importance of the evidence, or in  
order to ensure that the truth is told, that a person other than one of the participants swear an oath, the 
revenue authority may issue a request for examination under oath to the fiscal court within whose 
jurisdiction the person who is to take the oath r esides or has his abode. Where the person who is to take 
the oath does not reside or has no abode within the jurisdiction of a fiscal court or of an especially 
established senate, the request for examination under oath may also be made to the local court 
responsible.  
(2) The revenue authority shall specify the subject matter of the examination and the names and 
addresses of the participants in its request. The court shall inform the participants and the requesting 
revenue authority of the relevant dates. T he participants and the requesting revenue authority shall have 
the right to ask questions during the examination.  
(3) The court shall decide as to the lawfulness of a refusal to give evidence or to take the oath.  
Section 95  
Sworn statement  
(1) The revenue  authority may require the participant to make a sworn statement to confirm the 
correctness of his account. A sworn statement should only be required where other means of 
establishing the truth are not available, have failed to produce any results or would  require a 
disproportionate effort. A sworn statement may not be required of persons who are incapable of taking 
an oath pursuant to section 393 of the Code of Civil Procedure.  
(2) The sworn statement shall be recorded in writing by the revenue authority. Persons authorised to 
make such a recording shall be the head of the authority, his permanent deputy and members of the civil 
service qualified to exercise the functions of a judge or who fulfil the requirements of section 110, first 
sentence, of the Germa n Judiciary Act. The head of the authority or his permanent deputy may authorise 
in writing other members of the civil service to act generally in this capacity or for individual cases.  
(3) The details, the correctness of which is to be confirmed, shall be  recorded in writing and notified to 
the participant at least one week prior to the recording of the statement. The sworn statement shall 
consist in the participant’s repeating the facts previously stated by him and making the following 
declaration: “I do solemnly affirm that to the best of my knowledge I have told nothing but the truth and 
have concealed nothing.” Authorised representatives and advisers of the participant shall be entitled take 
part in the recording of the sworn statement.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 45 of 141 (4) Prior to the  recording of the sworn statement, the participant shall be instructed of the meaning of the 
sworn statement and the consequences under criminal law of making an incorrect or incomplete 
statement. The fact that this has been done shall be included in the w ritten record.  
(5) The written record shall in addition contain the names of those present and the place and date of the 
record. The written record shall be read to the participant making the statement for his approval, or, upon 
request, shall be made avai lable for him to inspect. The fact that this has been done shall be recorded 
and signed by the participant. The written record shall then be signed by the public official who received 
the sworn statement and by the recording clerk.  
(6) Sworn statements may  not be enforced pursuant to section 328 below.  
Section 96  
Enlistment of experts  
(1) The revenue authority shall determine whether an expert shall be enlisted. Except in cases of 
imminent danger, the revenue authority shall inform the participants beforeha nd of who it intends to 
enlist as expert.  
(2) An expert may be rejected by the participants for fear of bias where grounds exist to justify doubts as 
to his impartiality, or where it is feared that his work may infringe trade or business secrets or be 
prejudicial to the business activities of a participant. Notification of the rejection shall be asserted to the 
revenue authority without undue delay after the appointment of the expert has been communicated, or, 
at the latest, within two weeks and shall be ac companied by substantiation of the reasons for rejection. 
After that date, rejection shall only be permissible where it can be established credibly that the grounds 
for rejection could not have been asserted previously. The revenue authority which has appo inted or 
intends to appoint the expert shall decide on the rejection. The motion for rejection shall not have the 
effect of delaying proceedings.  
(3) The person appointed as an expert shall comply with the appointment if he has been publicly 
appointed to r ender opinions of the required kind, or if he publicly and commercially practices the 
science, art, or trade, the knowledge of which is a prerequisite for rendering an opinion, or if he has been 
publicly appointed or authorised to practice such profession.  Whoever has informed the revenue 
authority of his willingness to furnish an opinion shall also be obliged to do so.  
(4) Experts may refuse to furnish an opinion for fear of bias, indicating the reasons.  
(5) Members of the civil service shall be called in as experts only if they have received the authorisation 
required under civil service law.  
(6) Experts shall be alerted to the provisions on the protection of tax secrecy.  
(7) Opinions shall routinely be furnished in writing. Oral opinions may also be permi tted. Expert opinions 
may only be required to be supported by an administration of oath if the revenue authority considers this 
advisable in view of the importance of the expert opinion. Where the expert has previously taken an oath 
regarding the rendering  of opinions of the required kind, a reference to the oath previously taken shall be 
sufficient; such reference may also be made in a written opinion. Otherwise, section 94 shall apply 
mutatis mutandis  to the administration of the oath.  
III. Documentary ev idence and evidence by inspection  
Section 97  
Submission/presentation of documents  
(1) Participants and other persons must, upon request, submit/present accounts, records, business 
papers and other documents to the revenue authority for the purpose of inspe ction and audit. In this 
respect, the revenue authority shall indicate whether the documents are sought for the purpose of taxing 
the person required to submit/present the documentation or for the purpose of taxing other persons. 
Section 93(1), second and third sentences, shall apply accordingly.  
(2) The revenue authority may demand that the documentation referred to in subsection (1) above be 
submitted to the offices of the authorities or may inspect it at the premises of the person obliged to 
submit/prese nt the documentation if the latter has agreed to this or if the documents are unsuited for 
submission to the offices of the authorities. Section 147(5) shall apply accordingly.  
Section 98  
Carrying out inspections  
(1) Where the revenue authority carries out  an inspection, the result shall be included in the records.  
(2) Experts may be called in when the inspection is being carried out.  
Section 99  
Entry onto property and premises  
(1) Public officials entrusted by the revenue authority with carrying out the in spection and experts called 
in pursuant to sections 96 and 98 above shall be authorised to enter during regular business and 
working hours properties, premises, ships, enclosed operating facilities and similar facilities, to the extent Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 46 of 141 necessary in order t o reach findings in the interest of taxation. The persons affected should be given 
sufficient advance notice. Living quarters may only be entered against the wishes of the occupier where 
this serves to avert acute dangers to public security and order.  
(2) Measures pursuant to subsection (1) above may not be imposed for the purpose of searching for 
unknown objects.  
Section 100  
Presentation of valuables  
(1) The participant and other persons shall on request present to the revenue authority valuables 
(money, s ecurities, precious objects) to the extent necessary in the interest of taxation to establish their 
nature and value. Section 98(2) shall apply.  
(2) Presentation of valuables may not be ordered for the purpose of searching for unknown objects.  
IV. Right of  refusal to furnish information and documents  
Section 101  
Relatives’ right of refusal to furnish information and to take an oath  
(1) Relatives (section 15) of a participant may refuse to furnish information unless they are themselves 
obliged to furnish inf ormation on their personal tax affairs as participants or required to fulfil an obligation 
to furnish information for a participant. Relatives shall be instructed of their right to withhold information. 
It shall be mentioned in the record that such instruc tion was provided.  
(2) The persons referred to in subsection (1) above shall also have the right to refuse to affirm 
information by oath. The second and third sentences of subsection (1) above shall apply accordingly.  
Section 102  
Right to withhold informat ion to protect certain professional secrets  
(1) Other persons who may also refuse to furnish information shall be:  
1. clergymen, with regard to information that was entrusted to them or became known to them 
in their capacity as spiritual advisors,  
2. membe rs of the Bundestag, of a parliament of a Land  or a second chamber, with regard to 
persons who in their capacity as members of these bodies confided to them facts or to whom they 
confided facts in this capacity, as well as to the facts themselves.  
3.  
a) defence counsels,  
b) solicitors, patent agents, notaries, tax consultants, auditors, tax representatives, certified 
accountants,  
c) doctors, dentists, psychological psychotherapists, psychotherapists specialising in the 
treatment of children and juveniles, pharmacists and midwives,  
with regard to information entrusted to them or which became known to them in their professional 
capacity,  
4. persons who are or were professionally involved in the preparation, production or 
dissemination of periodically printed  matter or radio broadcasts with regard to the author, contributor 
or source of contributions and documentation and with regard to information received by them in their 
professional capacity insofar as this concerns contributions, documentation and informa tion for the 
editorial element of their activity; section 160 shall remain unaffected.  
(2) The persons specified in subsection (1) numbers 1 to 3 above shall be deemed equal to their 
assistants and to persons who take part in the professional activity in p reparation for the profession. The 
persons specified in subsection (1) numbers 1 to 3 above shall decide whether these assistants should 
exercise their right to refuse to furnish information, unless such a decision cannot be effected within a 
foreseeable p eriod.  
(3) The persons specified in subsection (1) number 3 above may not refuse to furnish information if they 
have been released from their obligation of secrecy. Such release from the obligation of secrecy shall 
also apply to the assistants.  
(4) The sta tutory notification duties applying to notaries and the obligations to furnish information 
applying to the persons referred to in subsection (1) number 3(b) above pursuant to the Interest 
Information Ordinance of 26 January 2004 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 128), which was most recently 
amended by Article 4(28) of the Act of 22 September 2005 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 2809), in the 
respective applicable version, shall remain unaffected. Where notification duties apply, notaries shall 
also be obliged to furni sh doc uments and further information.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 47 of 141 Section 103  
Right to withhold information for fear of prosecution for a criminal or administrative offence  
Persons who are neither participants nor obliged to furnish information for a participant may refuse to 
answer any questions to which a reply would expose them, or one of the relatives specified in section 15, 
to the risk of prosecution for a criminal or administrative offence. They shall be instructed of their right to 
withhold information. The provision of such i nstruction shall be noted in the records.  
Section 104  
Refusal to render opinion and to submit/present documents  
(1) To the extent that the disclosure of information may be refused, the rendering of opinion and the 
submission/presentation of documents or va luables may be refused as well. Section 102(4), second 
sentence, shall remain unaffected.  
(2) The submission/presentation of documents and valuables which are kept for the participant may not 
be refused where the participant would be obliged to submit/pres ent them, if held in his custody. 
Business records and other records kept for the participant shall also count as documents which are 
stored for him.  
Section 105  
Relationship between duty of public entities to furnish information and docu ments and their du ty 
of secrecy  
(1) The duty of secrecy imposed on authorities and other public entities, including the Bundesbank, state 
banks and debt administrations, as well as the organs and officials thereof, shall not apply with respect 
to their duty to submit/presen t information and documents to the revenue authorities.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall not apply where authorities and the persons entrusted with postal services 
are obliged by law to respect the privacy of correspondence, posts and telecommunications.  
Section 106  
Limitation on the duty to furnish information and documents in the case of adverse effects on 
the public interest  
It shall not be permissible to request that information or documents be furnished where the competent 
highest federal authority or th e competent highest authority of a Land  has stated that furnishing such 
information or documents would result in serious disadvantages to the Federation or to a Land . 
V. Compensation of persons obliged to furnish information and of experts  
Section 107  
Comp ensation of persons obliged to furnish information and of experts  
In the event that the revenue authority requires persons to furnish information, requires persons to make 
submissions, or consults experts for the purpose of evidence, such persons shall rec eive compensation 
or remuneration upon request under corresponding application of the Judicial Remuneration and 
Compensation Act. This shall not apply to participants or to persons required to furnish information or 
make submissions for a participant.  
4th Subchapter  
Time limits, deadlines, restitutio in integrum  
Section 108  
Time limits and deadlines  
(1) Sections 187 to 193 of the Civil Code shall apply accordingly to the calculation of time limits and the 
setting of deadlines inasmuch as subsections (2) to (5) below do not provide otherwise.  
(2) A time period set by an authority shall commence on the date following disclosure of the period 
except where the person concerned is informed otherwise.  
(3) Where the time limit would otherwise end on a Sunday, an of ficial holiday or a Saturday, the time 
period shall end at the close of the next working day.  
(4) Where an authority has to fulfil a task only for a given period, this period shall end at the close of the 
last day thereof, even where this is a Sunday, an o fficial holiday or a Saturday.  
(5) A deadline fixed by an authority shall be observed even if it falls on a Sunday, an official holiday or a 
Saturday.  
(6) Where a time limit is expressed in hours, Sundays, official holidays and Saturdays shall be included.  
Section 109  
Extension of time limits  
 (1) Subject to subsection (2) below, time limits for filing tax returns and time limits fixed by a revenue 
authority may be extended. Subject to subsection (2) below, time limits may be extended retroactively in Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 48 of 141 cases  where they have already expired, particularly if it would be unreasonable to allow the legal 
consequences resulting from the expiration of the time limit to stand.  
(2) In cases  
1.  under section 149(3) involving periods after the last day of February in t he second calendar 
year following the tax period and  
2.  under section 149(4) involving periods after the date designated in the tax office’s order,  
subsection (1) shall apply only if the taxpayer is or was prevented from complying with the tax return 
filing deadline through no fault of his own. For taxpayers who calculate their profits from agricultural and 
forestry activities on the basis of a financial year that deviates from the calendar year, 31 July of the 
second calendar year following the tax perio d shall apply instead of the last day of February. If the failure 
to meet the specified deadline is the fault of a representative or aide, the fault shall be attributed to the 
taxpayer.  
(3) Revenue authorities may attach conditions to the extension of a de adline, in particular by making the 
extension contingent up on the provision of collateral.  
Section 110  
Restitutio in integrum  
(1) Where a person has through no fault of his own been prevented from observing a statutory time limit, 
he shall, upon applicatio n, be granted restitutio in integrum . The fault of a representative shall be 
deemed to be that of the person he represents.  
(2) The application shall be made within one month of the removal of the obstacle. The facts justifying 
the application are to be es tablished credibly when the application is made or during the proceedings 
connected with the application. The neglected action shall be subsequently effected within the 
application period. Where this is done, restitutio in integrum  may be granted even with out application.  
(3) No application for restitutio in integrum  may be filed and the neglected action cannot be subsequently 
effected following the expiration of one year from the end of the unobserved time limit, except where it 
was impossible for this to be done within the period of a year for reasons of force majeure . 
(4) The application for restitutio in integrum  shall be decided upon by the revenue authority responsible 
for deciding on the matter of the neglected action.  
5th Subchapter  
Legal and adminis trative assistance  
Section 111  
Administrative assistance obligations  
(1) All courts and authorities shall be obliged to provide such administrative assistance as is necessary 
to execute the taxation procedure. Section 102 shall remain unaffected.  
(2) It sh all not be deemed administrative assistance when  
1. authorities assist each other in the context of a relationship in which one is bound by the 
instructions of the other,  
2. assistance consists in actions which already fall under the remit of the requeste d authority.  
(3) This provision shall not apply to debt administrations, credit institutions and commercial enterprises of 
public -law entities.  
(4) With respect to customs administration, the obligation to provide administrative assistance shall also 
apply  to those enterprises serving public transport or the public movement of goods which have been 
specially appointed as auxiliary customs bodies by the Federal Ministry of Finance, and to the staff 
thereof.  
(5) Sections 105 and 106 shall apply accordingly.  
Section 112  
Preconditions for and limitations to administrative assistance  
(1) A revenue authority may request administrative assistance in particular when  
1. for legal reasons, it cannot itself perform the official act,  
2. for practical reasons, especially  for lack of personnel or equipment needed to perform the 
official act, it cannot itself perform the official act,  
3. to carry out its tasks, it requires knowledge of facts which are unknown to it and which it 
cannot itself establish,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 49 of 141 4. to carry out its t asks, it requires documents or other evidence in the possession of the 
requested authority,  
5. it could only perform the official act at substantially greater expense than the requested 
authority.  
(2) The requested authority may not provide assistance whe n it is unable to do so for legal reasons.  
(3) The requested authority need not provide assistance when  
1. another authority can provide the same assistance with much greater ease or at much less 
expense,  
2. it could only provide such assistance at disprop ortionately great expense,  
3. taking into account the tasks of the requesting revenue authority, such assistance would, as 
a result of its scope, seriously endanger the requested authority’s capacity to meet its own duties.  
(4) The requested authority may not refuse assistance on the grounds that it considers the request 
inappropriate for reasons other than those given in subsection (3) above, or that it considers the 
measures to be realised by the administrative assistance inappropriate.  
(5) Where the requ ested authority does not consider itself obliged to provide assistance, it shall inform 
the requesting revenue authority accordingly. If the latter insists that administrative assistance be 
provided, the decision as to whether or not an obligation to furni sh such assistance exists shall be taken 
by the responsible common supervisory authority or, where no such authority exists, the supervisory 
authority with subject -matter jurisdiction over the requested authority.  
Section 113  
Selecting an authority  
Where t here is more than one potential provider of administrative assistance, assistance shall where 
possible be requested of an authority of the lowest administrative level of the administrative branch to 
which the requesting revenue authority belongs.  
Section 1 14 
Implementation of administrative assistance  
(1) The permissibility of the measure to be realised by administrative assistance shall be governed by 
the laws applying to the requesting revenue authority, the implementation of administrative assistance by  
the laws applying to the requested authority.  
(2) The requesting revenue authority shall bear responsibility vis -à-vis the requested authority for the 
legality of the measure to be taken. The requested authority shall be responsible for implementing the 
administrative assistance.  
Section 115  
Costs of administrative assistance  
(1) The requesting revenue authority shall not be required to pay the requested authority an 
administrative fee for the provision of assistance. Where, in individual cases, expenses e xceed 25 euros, 
these shall be refunded to the requested authority upon request. Where authorities of the same legal 
entity assist each other, no expenses shall be reimbursed.  
(2) Where in implementing administrative assistance the requested authority perf orms an official act for 
which a fee must be paid, it shall be entitled to any costs caused for this purpose by a third party 
(administrative fees, usage charges and expenses).  
Section 116  
Reporting tax crimes  
(1) Courts and the authorities of the Federat ion, the Länder  and municipal institutions of public 
administrations which are not revenue authorities must notify the Federal Central Tax Office or, to the 
extent known, the revenue authorities responsible for the criminal tax proceedings, of facts that h ave 
become known to them in the course of exercise of their office and that suggest that a tax crime has 
been committed. Unless it is clear that the revenue authorities responsible for the criminal tax 
proceedings have already been informed directly, the F ederal Central Tax Office shall inform them of 
these facts. The revenue authorities responsible for the criminal tax proceedings, excluding the 
authorities of the federal customs administration, shall transmit the notification to the Federal Central Tax 
Office unless it is clear that the latter has already been informed directly.  
(2) Section 105(2) shall apply accordingly.  
Section 117  
International legal and administrative assistance in tax matters  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 50 of 141 (1) The revenue authorities may avail themselves of interna tional legal and administrative assistance 
subject to the provisions of German law.  
(2) The revenue authorities may provide international legal and administrative assistance on the basis of 
nationally applicable international agreements, nationally applica ble legal instruments of the European 
Union and the EU Mutual Assistance Act.  
(3) Using due discretion, the revenue authorities may  provide international legal and administrative 
assistance upon request in other cases where  
1. reciprocity is assured,  
2. the requesting state guarantees that the information and the documents supplied will be 
used only for the purposes of its taxation or criminal tax procedure (including procedures related to 
administrative offences) and that the information and the documents supplied will be disclosed only to 
such persons, authorities or courts as are concerned with the processing of the tax case or the 
prosecution of the tax crime;  
3. the requesting state guarantees that it is prepared to avoid any double taxation on income,  
capital gains and assets by way of mutual agreement procedure through the appropriate adjustment 
of the tax base, and  
4. compliance with the request is not detrimental to the sovereignty, security, public order or 
other essential interests of the Federatio n or its political subdivisions and there is no danger of the 
person concerned in Germany incurring damage incompatible with the purpose of the legal and 
administrative assistance in the event that a trade, industrial, commercial or professional secret or a 
business process which is to be communicated on the basis of th e request is disclosed.  
To the extent that international legal and administrative assistance pertains to taxes administered by 
Land  revenue authorities, the Federal Ministry of Finance shall take a decision in mutual agreement with 
the competent highest authority of the Land  concerned.  
(4) When implementing legal and administrative assistance, the powers of the revenue authorities and 
the rights and obligations of the participants and other pe rsons shall be based on the provisions applying 
to taxes as defined in section 1(1). Section 114 shall apply accordingly. Section 91 shall apply 
accordingly with regard to domestic participants where information and documents are transmitted; 
notwithstandi ng section 91(1), domestic participants shall invariably be consulted where legal and 
administrative assistance pertains to taxes administered by Land  revenue authorities, unless VAT is 
concerned, an information exchange is taking place on the basis of the  EU Mutual Assistance Act, or 
exceptional circumstances exist within the meaning of section 91(2) or (3).  
(5) For the purposes of promoting international cooperation, the Federal Ministry of Finance shall be 
authorised, by way of ordinances issued with the  consent of the Bundesrat, to enact international 
agreements on mutual legal and administrative assistance in customs matters if the obligations thus 
assumed do not go beyond the scope of the international legal and administrative assistan ce permissible 
under this Code.  
Section 117a  
Transmission of personal data to Member States of the European Union  
(1) At the request of a public agency of a Member State of the European Union responsible for the 
prevention and prosecution of crimes, the offices of the reve nue authorities charged with tax 
investigation may transmit personal data in connection with the remit stipulated in section 208 for the 
purposes of preventing crimes. The provisions on data transmission in the domestic context shall apply 
accordingly for the transmission of this data.  
(2) Transmission of personal data pursuant to subsection (1) above shall only be permissible if the 
request contains at least the following details:  
1.  the name and address of the requesting authority,  
2.  description of the  crime for the prevention of which the data are required,  
3. description of the facts of the case on which the request is based,  
4.  designation of the purpose for which the data are sought,  
5.  the connection between the purpose for which the information or intelligence are sought and 
the person who is the subject of the information,  
6.  details about the identity of the person concerned insofar as the request relates to a known 
person, and  
7.  reasons for believing the relevant information and intelligenc e are available in Germany.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 51 of 141 (3) The offices of the revenue authorities charged with tax investigation may also spontaneously transmit 
personal data within the meaning of subsection (1) above to a public agency of a Member State of the 
European Union respon sible for the prevention and prosecution of crimes where, in the individual case, 
there is a risk of the commission of a crime within the meaning of Article 2(2) of Council Framework 
Decision 2002/584/JHA of 13 June 2002 on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures 
between Member States (OJ L 190, 18 July 2002, p. 1), most recently amended by Framework Decision 
2009/299/JHA (OJ L 81, 27 February 2009, p. 24), and there are solid indications that the transmission 
of this personal data could co ntribute to preventing such a crime.  
(4) The provisions on data transmission in the domestic context shall apply accordingly for the 
transmission of data pursuant to subsection (3) above. There shall be no data transmission insofar as, 
and with due regard to the specific public interest in the transmission of the data, the legitimate interests 
of the person concerned are overriding in the individual case. Legitimate interests shall also include the 
existence of an appropriate level of data protection in the  receiving state. The legitimate interests of the 
person concerned may also be safeguarded by the receiving state or the receiving international or 
supranational agency guaranteeing, in the individual case, the protection of the transmitted data.  
(5) There  shall be no data transmission pursuant to subsections (1) and (3) above where  
1.  this would impair the essential security interests of the Federation or the Länder , 
2.  the transmission of data would contradict the principles contained in Article 6 of th e Treaty 
on European Union,  
3.  the data to be transmitted are not held by the requested authority and can only be obtained 
by taking coercive measures, or  
4.  the transmission of the data would be disproportionate or the data are not required for the 
purposes for which they are to be transmitted.  
(6) The data transmission pursuant to subsections (1) and (3) above may be refrained from where  
1.  the data to be transmitted are not held by the offices of the revenue authorities charged with 
tax investigatio n but can be obtained without the taking of coercive measures,  
2.  this would present a risk to the success of on -going investigations or to a person’s body, life 
or freedom, or  
3.  the act, for the prevention of which the data are to be transmitted, is pu nishable under 
German law by means of imprisonment for a maximum one year or less.  
(7) The public agency of a Member State of the European Union responsible for the prevention and 
prosecution of crimes within the meaning of subsections (1) and (3) above sh all be any agency 
appointed by this state pursuant to Article 2(a) of Council Framework Decision 2006/960/JHA of 18 
December 2006 on simplifying the exchange of information and intelligence between law enforcement 
authorities of the Member States of the Eu ropean Union (OJ L 386 of 29 December 2006, p. 89, OJ L 75 
of 15 March 2007, p. 26).  
(8) Subsections (1) to (7) above shall also apply to the transmission of personal data to public agencies 
of a Schengen associated state responsible for the prevention and  prosecution of crimes within the 
meaning of section 91(3) of the Act on International Judicial Assistance in Criminal Matters.  
Section 117b  
Use of data to be supplied pursuant to Framework Decision 2006/960/JHA  
(1) Data which have been transmitted pursuan t to Framework Agreement 2006/960/JHA to the offices of 
the revenue authorities charged with tax investigation may only be used for the purposes for which they 
were transmitted or to avert a present and substantial threat to public security. The data may o nly be 
used for other purposes or as evidence in judicial proceedings if the transmitting state has given its 
consent. The conditions set for the use of the data by the transmitting state are to be observed.  
(2) The offices of the revenues authorities char ged with tax investigation shall furnish information to the 
transmitting state, at that state’s request for the purposes of monitoring data protection, about how the 
transmitted data were used.  
Section 117c  
Implementation of nationally applicable internati onal agreements to improve international tax 
compliance  
(1) The Federal Ministry of Finance shall be authorised, for the purposes of fulfilling obligations under 
nationally applicable international agreements that serve to improve tax compliance by means o f the 
systematic collection and transmission of relevant tax data, to adopt, by way of ordinances issued with 
the consent of the Bundesrat, rules on  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 52 of 141 1.  the collection of the data required under these agreements by third parties who are 
specified in princi ple in these agreements,  
2.  the transmission of these data to the Federal Central Tax Office, using officially prescribed 
data sets sent via remote data transmission,  
3.  the forwarding of these data to the competent authorities of other contracting state s and  
4.  the receipt of relevant data from other contracting states and the forwarding of such data to 
the competent Land  revenue authority in accordance with section 88(3) and (4).  
Ordinances issued in accordance with the first sentence above may grant t he Federal Central Tax Office 
the right to analyse, for the purpose of fulfilling its legally assigned responsibilities, the data and reports it 
receives in accordance with section 9(1) and (2) of the FATCA Implementation Ordinance. This shall 
have no effe ct on analyses by competent Land  revenue authorities of reports received in accordance 
with section 9(2) of the FATCA Implementation Ordinance.  
(2) In cases where data are transmitted by the Federal Central Tax Office to the competent revenue 
authority of the other contracting state pursuant to an ordinance issued on the basis of the first sentence 
of subsection (1) above, no consultation of the participants shall be conducted.  
(3) The Federal Central Tax Office shall be entitled to examine facts and circum stances that are of 
relevance for the fulfilment of obligations to collect and transmit data pursuant to an ordinance issued on 
the basis of subsection (1) above, or that require clarification, in relation to parties obliged to collect 
these data and trans mit them to the Federal Central Tax Office. Articles 193 to 203 shall apply mutatis 
mutandis . 
(4) The data collected by the Federal Central Tax Office on the basis of an ordinance pursuant to 
subsection (1) above or as part of an examination pursuant to su bsection (3) above may be used only for 
the purposes specified in the underlying international agreements. Where country -by-country reports are 
transmitted by the Federal Central Tax Office in accordance with section 138a(7), first to third sentences, 
no consultation of the participants shall be conducted.  
Second Chapter  
Administrative acts  
Section 118  
Definition of administrative act  
An administrative act shall be any order, decision or other sovereign measure taken by an authority to 
regulate an individua l case in the sphere of public law and intended to have a direct, external legal effect. 
A general order shall be an administrative act directed towards a group of people defined or definable on 
the basis of general characteristics or relating to the publi c law character of a matter or its use by the 
public at large.  
Section 119  
Clarity and form of an administrative act  
(1) An administrative act shall be sufficiently definite and precise in content.  
(2) An administrative act may be issued in written, electr onic, oral or other form. An oral administrative 
act shall be confirmed in writing when there is a legitimate interest that this should be done and the 
person concerned requests this without undue delay.  
(3) A written or electronic administrative act shall  indicate the issuing authority. Furthermore, it shall 
contain the signature or name of the head of the authority, his deputy or the person appointed by him; 
this provision shall not apply to administrative acts issued using a standard form or with the aid  of 
automated mechanisms. Where the law requires that an administrative act be in writing, the issuing 
authority shall be indicated on the qualified certificate underlying the electronic signature or on an 
associated qualified attribute certificate in the case of electronic administrative acts. Where section 
87a(4), third sentence, applies, the confirmation pursuant to section 5(5) of the DE -Mail Act must 
indicate the issuing revenue authority as user of the DE -Mail account.  
Section 120  
Ancillary provisions  to administrative acts  
(1) An administrative act to which a claim exists may be accompanied by ancillary provisions only when 
this is permitted by law or when it is designed to ensure that the legal requirements for the administrative 
act are fulfilled.  
(2) With due discretion, and notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) above, an administrative act 
may be issued with:  
1. a provision to the effect that a privilege or burden shall begin or end on a certain date or 
shall apply for a certain period ( time limit),  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 53 of 141 2. a provision to the effect that the commencement or ending of a privilege or burden shall 
depend upon a future occurrence which is uncertain (condition),  
3. a reservation that the act is subject to revocation,  
or be combined with  
4. a prov ision requiring the beneficiary to perform, tolerate or omit to do a certain action 
(obligation),  
5. a reservation to the effect that an obligation may be subsequently introduced, amended or 
supplemented.  
(3) An ancillary provision may not counteract the purpose of the administrative act.  
Section 121 
Reasons for an administrative act  
(1) A written or electronic administrative act, as well as an administrative act confirmed in writing or 
electronically, shall be accompanied by a statement of reasons where t his is necessary for its 
comprehension.  
(2) No statement of reasons shall be required:  
1. where the revenue authority grants an application or acts upon a declaration and the 
administrative act does not infringe upon the rights of another,  
2. where the per son for whom the administrative act is intended or who is affected by it is 
already acquainted with the opinion of the revenue authority as to the material and legal positions or 
is able to comprehend such without difficulty,  
3. where the revenue authorit y issues similar administrative acts in large number or with the 
help of automated mechanisms and individual cases do not merit a statement of reasons,  
4. where this derives from a legal provision,  
5. where a general order is publicly disclosed.  
Section 12 2 
Disclosure of an administrative act  
(1) An administrative act shall be disclosed to the person for whom it is intended or who is affected 
thereby. Section 34(2) shall apply accordingly. The administrative act may also be disclosed to an 
authorised repres entative. The act should be disclosed to the authorised representative if the revenue 
authorities are in possession of a written authorisation or an authorisation transmitted electronically using 
an officially prescribed data set, as long as the authorised  representative has not been barred pursuant 
to section 80(7).  
(2) A written administrative act sent by post shall be deemed as disclosed  
1. on the third day after posting if posted to an address within Germany,  
2. one month after posting if posted to an address outside Germany,  
except where it was not received or was received at a later date; in case of doubt the authority shall 
prove receipt of the administrative act and the date of receipt.  
(2a) An administrative act sent electronically shall be deemed as disclosed on the third day after sending 
except where it was not received or was received at a later date; in case of doubt the authority shall 
prove receipt of the administrative act and the date of receipt.  
(3) An administrative act may be publicly di sclosed where this is permitted by law. A general order may 
be publicly disclosed even where it is inappropriate to disclose it to those concerned.  
(4) The public disclosure of an administrative act shall be effected by publicising the act’s operative 
terms in accordance with standard local practice. Such disclosure shall state where the administrative 
act and its statement of reasons may be viewed. The administrative act shall be deemed disclosed two 
weeks after the date when the act is publicised in accor dance with standard local practice. A general 
order may specify a different date for this purpose, but such date may be no earlier than the day after the 
act is publicised.  
(5) An administrative act shall be served if so required by law or if so ordered by  authorities. Subject to 
the third sentence above, the service of administrative acts shall be performed in accordance with the 
provisions of the Administrative Service of Documents Act. In derogation of section 7(1), second 
sentence, of the Administrative  Service of Documents Act, the fourth sentence of subsection (1) above 
shall apply to the service of an administrative act to an authorised representative.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 54 of 141 (6) The disclosure of an administrative act to a participant with simultaneous effect for and agains t other 
participants shall be permissible to the extent that the participants have agreed to this; these participants 
may subsequently request to receive a copy of the administrative act.  
(7) Where administrative acts concern  
1. spouses or civil partners o r 
2. spouses and their children, civil partners and their children, or single parents and their 
children,  
it shall suffice for disclosure to all concerned where one copy is served to their joint address. 
Administrative acts shall be disclosed separately to  the participants if they so request or if the revenue 
authority has knowledge of serious differences of opinion between them.  
Section 122a  
Disclosure of administrative acts via electronic retrieval  
(1) Administrative acts may, with the consent of the part icipant or his authorised representative, be 
disclosed by making them available for electronic retrieval via remote data transmission.  
(2) Consent may be revoked at any time with effect for the future. Revocation of consent shall not take 
effect with the r evenue authorities until they receive such revocation.  
(3) The person who is authorised to retrieve the administrative act shall authenticate himself in 
accordance with section 87a(8).  
(4) An administrative act made available for electronic retrieval shall  be deemed disclosed on the third 
day after notification of the act’s availability has been sent to the person authorised to retrieve the 
relevant data. In cases of doubt, the authorities must provide proof that the notification was received. If 
the revenu e authorities cannot provide proof of the notification’s receipt by the person who is authorised 
to retrieve the administrative act and who disputes receipt, the act shall be deemed disclosed on the 
date when the person authorised to retrieve the act carri ed out the retrieval. The same shall apply if the 
person authorised to retrieve the act asserts irrefutably that he did not receive the notification within 
three days after it was sent.  
Section 123  
Appointment of an authorised recipient  
A participant with no residence or habitual abode, registered office or business management in 
Germany, in another Member State of the European Union, or in a country where the Agreement on the 
European Economic Area applies shall, upon request and within a reasonable period  of time, provide the 
revenue authority with the name of an authorised recipient in Germany. Should he fail to do so, any 
document sent to him shall be deemed as having been received one month after its posting, and a 
document transmitted electronically sh all be regarded as having been received on the third day after its 
transmission. This shall not apply if it is established that the document or the electronic document did not 
reach the recipient at all or reached him at a later date. The participant shall  be informed of the legal 
consequences of the omission.  
Section 124  
Validity of an administrative act  
(1) An administrative act shall take effect vis -à-vis the person for whom it is intended or who is affected 
thereby at the moment it is disclosed to him. The administrative act shall apply in accordance with its 
content as disclosed.  
(2) An administrative act shall remain in effect for as long as it is not withdrawn, revoked, otherwise 
cancelled or expires through the passage of time or for any other reason . 
(3) An invalid administrative act shall have no effect.  
Section 125  
Invalidity of an administrative act  
(1) An administrative act shall be invalid where it is very gravely erroneous and this is apparent when all 
relevant circumstances are duly considered . 
(2) Regardless of the conditions laid down in subsection (1) above, an administrative act shall be invalid 
if: 
1. it is issued in written or electronic form but fails to indicate the issuing revenue authority,  
2. no person can comply with it for practica l reasons,  
3. it requires an illegal act to be committed, by virtue of which the conditions for a criminal 
offence or an administrative offence are fulfilled,  
4. it is contrary to public policy.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 55 of 141 (3) An administrative act shall not be invalid merely because : 
1. provisions on local jurisdiction have not been observed,  
2. a person excluded under section 82(1), first sentence, numbers 2 to 6 and section 82(1), 
second sentence, is involved,  
3. a committee required by law to cooperate in the issue of the administ rative act did not or 
was unable to take the prescribed decision,  
4. the cooperation required by law of another authority did not occur.  
(4) Where the invalidity applies only to part of the administrative act, it shall be deemed invalid in its 
entirety if the invalid part is so essential that the revenue authority would not have issued the 
administrative act without it.  
(5) The revenue authority may at any time ascertain invalidity ex officio ; it must be ascertained upon 
application when the applicant has a  legitimate interest in such.  
Section 126  
Remedying errors in procedure and form  
(1) An infringement of the regulations governing procedure or form which does not render the 
administrative act invalid under section 125 shall be disregarded in the event tha t 
1. an application necessary to issue the administrative act is made subsequently,  
2. a necessary statement of reasons is provided subsequently,  
3. a necessary participant consultation is held subsequently,  
4. a decision of a committee whose cooperation i s required to issue the administrative act is 
taken subsequently,  
5. the necessary participation of another authority is obtained subsequently.  
(2) Actions referred to in subsection (1) numbers 2 to 5 above may be carried out subsequently up until 
the tria l court proceedings of a fiscal court matter have been concluded.  
(3) Where an administrative act lacks the necessary statement of reasons or has been issued without 
the necessary consultation of a participant so that the administrative act was unable to b e contested in 
time, failure to observe the period for objection shall not be considered a fault. The decisive event for 
restitutio in integrum  under section 110(2) shall be deemed to occur when the procedural action which 
was omitted is subsequently under taken.  
Section 127  
Consequences of errors in procedure and form  
A claim for the cancellation of an administrative act which is not invalid under section 125 may not be 
made solely on the grounds that the act came into being in breach of provisions governin g procedure, 
form or local jurisdiction if no other decision could  have been taken in the matter.  
Section 128  
Reinterpretation of an erroneous administrative act  
(1) An erroneous administrative act may be reinterpreted into another administrative act where  it has the 
same aim, could have been issued legitimately by the issuing revenue authority using the same 
procedures and forms, and where the requirements for its issue are fulfilled.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall not apply where the administrative act in to which the erroneous 
administrative act is to be reinterpreted would contradict the clearly recognisable intention of the issuing 
revenue authority or where its legal consequences would be less favourable for the person affected than 
those of the erroneo us administrative act. Furthermore, reinterpretation shall not be permissible where 
the withdrawal of the administrative act would not be allowable.  
(3) A decision which can only be issued as being bound by law may not be reinterpreted into a 
discretionary  decision.  
(4) Section 91 shall apply accordingly.  
Section 129  
Obvious errors in issuing an administrative act  
The revenue authority may at any time correct typographical mistakes, errors in calculation and similar 
obvious errors which have occurred in is suing an administrative act. Corrections shall be made where 
the participant has a legitimate interest in such. Where adjustment to an administrative act issued in 
writing is sought, the revenue authority shall be entitled to request submission of the docu ment which is 
to be corrected.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 56 of 141 Section 130  
Withdrawal of an unlawful administrative act  
(1) An unlawful administrative act may, even after it has become incontestable, be withdrawn wholly or in 
part with ex nunc  or retroactive effect.  
(2) An administrative  act which gives rise to a right or a substantial advantage in legal terms or confirms 
such a right or advantage (beneficial administrative act) may only be withdrawn where  
1. it has been issued by an authority without the requisite subject -matter jurisdic tion, 
2. it has been effected by improper means such as fraudulent misrepresentation, threat or 
bribery,  
3. the beneficiary obtained the administrative act by providing information which was 
essentially incorrect or incomplete,  
4. the beneficiary was aware  of its illegality, or was unaware of this due to gross negligence.  
(3) Where the revenue authority learns of facts which justify the withdrawal of an unlawful beneficial 
administrative act, the withdrawal shall be permissible only within one year of the d ate of gaining such 
knowledge. This shall not apply in the case of subsection (2) number 2 above.  
(4) Once the administrative act has become incontestable, the decision concerning withdrawal shall be 
taken by the revenue authority responsible under the pro visions regarding local jurisdiction; this shall 
also apply where the administrative act to be withdrawn has been issued by another revenue authority; 
section 26, second sentence, shall remain unaffected.  
Section 131  
Revocation of a lawful administrative a ct 
(1) A lawful, non -beneficial administrative act may, even after it has become incontestable, be revoked 
wholly or in part with ex nunc  effect, except where an administrative act of like content would have to be 
issued or where revocation is impermissibl e for other reasons.  
(2) A lawful, beneficial administrative act may, even when it has become incontestable, be revoked in 
whole or in part with ex nunc  effect only when  
1. revocation is permitted by law or a right of revocation is reserved in the administ rative act 
itself,  
2. the administrative act is combined with an obligation with which the beneficiary has not 
complied with at all or in time,  
3. the revenue authority would be entitled, as a result of subsequent changes in 
circumstances, not to issue the  administrative act and if failure to revoke it would endanger the public 
interest.  
Section 130(3) shall apply accordingly.  
(3) The revoked administrative act shall become null and void with the entry into force of the revocation, 
provided that the revenu e authority has not determined a later date.  
(4) Once the administrative act has become incontestable, decisions as to revocation shall be taken by 
the revenue authority responsible under the provisions regarding local jurisdiction; this shall also apply 
where the administrative act to be revoked has been issued by another revenue authority.  
Section 132  
Withdrawal, revocation, cancellation and amendment in legal remedy proceedings  
The provisions on withdrawal, revocation, cancellation and amendment of admin istrative acts shall also 
apply during objection proceedings and proceedings before the fiscal courts. Section 130(2) and (3) and 
section 131(2) and (3) shall not prevent withdrawal and revocation during the objection proceeding, or 
during the proceedings before a fiscal court, of a beneficial administrative act that has been contested by 
a third party to the extent that this remedies the objection or appeal.  
Section 133  
Return of documents and other items  
Where an administrative act has been incontestably revoked or withdrawn, or where it is not or no longer 
in effect for other reasons, the revenue authority may require such documents or items as have been 
distributed as a result of the administrative act, and which serve to prove the rights deriving from t he 
administrative act or its exercise, to be returned. The holder and, where this person is not the owner, 
also the owner of these documents or items shall be obliged to return them. However, the holder or 
owner may require that the documents or items be h anded back to him once the revenue authority has 
marked them as invalid; this shall not apply to items for which such a marking is impossible or cannot be 
made with the necessary degree of visibility or permanence.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 57 of 141 Fourth Part  
Executing the taxation proced ure 
First Chapter  
Recording taxpayer data  
1st Subchapter  
Data relating to civil status and operations  
Section 134  
(rescinded)  
Section 135  
(rescinded)  
Section 136  
(rescinded)  
2nd Subchapter  
Duties of disclosure  
Section 137  
The recording for tax purposes of corporations, associations and pools of assets  
(1) Taxpayers who are not natural persons shall be obliged to notify the tax office responsible under 
section 20 and the municipalities responsible for levying non -personal taxes of the circumstances which 
have a bearing on registration for tax purposes, especially establishment, attainment of legal capacity, 
change of legal form, transfer of place of business management or registered office, and dissolution.  
(2) Disclosure of these reportable events shall be m ade within one month of their occurrence.  
Section 138  
Reporting commercial activity  
(1) Whoever opens an agricultural and forestry undertaking, a commercial operation or a permanent 
establishment shall notify the municipality in which this business or perm anent establishment is located 
of such on an officially prescribed form; the municipality shall inform without undue delay the tax office 
responsible under section 22(1) of the content of the notification. Where responsibility for determining the 
non-perso nal taxes has not been conferred on the municipalities, the tax office responsible under section 
22(2) shall take the place of the municipality. Any person who takes up self -employment shall notify the 
tax office with local jurisdiction under section 19 of  such activity. The same shall apply for the relocation 
or discontinuation of a business, permanent establishment or self -employment.  
(1a) Traders within the meaning of section 2 of the VAT Act may also fulfil their reporting obligations 
under subsection ( 1) above electronically at the revenue authority responsible for VAT.  
(1b) In order to simplify the taxation procedure, the Federal Ministry of Finance may determine, by way 
of ordinances issued with the consent of the Bundesrat, that traders as defined in  section 2 of the VAT 
Act must, when commencing a professional or commercial activity, in addition to the notifications under 
subsections (1) and (1a) above, provide the revenue authorities with information on the legal and actual 
circumstances relevant to  taxation, using an officially prescribed data set sent via remote data 
transmission. The conditions under which an electronic transmission may be waived may be stipulated in 
such ordinances.  
(2) Taxpayers whose residence, habitual abode, place of manageme nt or registered office is located 
within the jurisdiction of this Code (domestic taxpayers) shall notify the tax office with local jurisdiction 
under sections 18 to 20 of the following:  
1.  the founding and acquisition of businesses and permanent establis hments abroad;  
2.  the acquisition, disposal or modification of holdings in foreign partnerships;  
3.  the purchase or sale of holdings in a corporation, association or pool of assets whose 
registered office and place of management are located outside the j urisdiction of this Code, if  
a) this leads to holdings amounting to least 10 percent of the capital or assets of the 
corporation, association or pool of assets or  
b) total costs for acquiring all of the holdings exceed 150,000 euros;  
4.  the fact that the domestic taxpayer can for the first time exercise controlling or decisive 
influence, directly or indirectly, over the financial, business or company law related affairs of a third -
country company, alone or jointly with related parties as defined in section  1(2) of the External Tax 
Relations Act;  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 58 of 141 5.  the type of economic activity conducted by the business, permanent establishment, 
partnership, corporation, association, asset pool or third -country company.  
In cases where number 3 above applies, direct and ind irect holdings shall be added together in one sum. 
(3) “Third -country company” shall mean a partnership, corporation, association or asset pool whose 
registered office or place of management is located in states or territories that are not members of the 
European Union or the European Free Trade Association.  
(4) Notifications under subsections (1) and (1a) above shall be submitted within one month of the 
reportable event.  
(5) Notifications under subsection (2) above shall be submitted together with the inco me tax return or 
corporation tax return for the tax period during which the reportable circumstances occurred, and no later 
than 14 months after such tax period ends, using officially prescribed data sets and officially designated 
interfaces. Domestic taxp ayers who are not required to file their income tax returns or corporation tax 
returns using officially prescribed data sets and officially designated interfaces must submit the relevant 
notifications using an officially prescribed form unless they volunta rily file their income tax return or 
corporation tax return using an officially prescribed data set and the officially designated interface. 
Domestic taxpayers who are not required to file an income tax return or corporation tax return must 
submit the rele vant notifications within 14 months after the end of the calendar year during which the 
reportable circumstances occurred, using an officially prescribed form.  
Section 138a  
Country -by-country reports by multinational enterprise groups  
(1) After the end of a financial year, an enterprise with registered office or place of management in 
Germany (domestic enterprise) that prepares consolidated financial statements or that must prepare 
them pursuant to rules other than tax laws (domestic group parent) shall com pile a group country -by-
country report for that financial year and submit it to the Federal Central Tax Office if  
1.  the consolidated financial statements cover at least one enterprise with registered office and 
place of management in another country (for eign enterprise) or at least one foreign permanent 
establishment and  
2.  the previous financial year’s consolidated revenue, as reported in the consolidated financial 
statements, totals at least 750 million euros.  
Subject to subsections (3) and (4) below, the obligation under the first sentence above shall not apply if 
the domestic enterprise as defined in the first sentence above is included in the consolidated financial 
statements of another enterprise.  
(2) The country -by-country report as defined in subs ection (1) above shall contain:  
1.  an overview, broken down according to tax jurisdiction, of how the group’s business 
activities are distributed throughout the tax jurisdictions in which its enterprises or permanent 
establishments are engaged  in business  activity; to this end, the overview shall state the following 
information, based on its consolidated financial statements:  
a) revenue and other income from business transactions with related parties,  
b) revenue and other income from business transactions  with unrelated parties,  
c) total revenue and other income pursuant to letters a) and b) above,  
d) income taxes paid during the financial year,  
e) income taxes paid and accrued during the financial year for that financial year  
f) profit (loss) before inc ome taxes  
g) stated capital,  
h) accumulated earnings,  
i) number of employees and  
j) tangible assets  
2.  a list of all enterprises and permanent establishments, broken down according to tax 
jurisdiction, which are covered by the information reported under n umber 1 above, together with the 
most important b usiness activities they perform  
3.  any additional information that the domestic group parent considers necessary to 
understand the overview under number 1 above and the list under number 2 above.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 59 of 141 (3) If the  consolidated financial statements of a foreign enterprise, which under the provisions of 
subsection (1) above would be required to submit a country -by-country report if its registered office or 
place of management were located in Germany (foreign group pa rent), cover a domestic enterprise 
(constituent domestic entity), and if the foreign group parent tasks the constituent domestic entity with 
submitting a country -by-country report for the group (reporting entity), then the reporting entity shall 
submit the  country -by-country report to the Federal Central Tax Office.  
(4) A covered domestic group company shall be required to submit to the Federal Central Tax Office the 
country -by-country report for a group with a foreign group parent, which under the provisio ns of 
subsection (1) above would be required to submit a country -by-country report if its registered office or 
place of management were located in Germany, if the Federal Central Tax Office has not received a 
country -by-country report. If a constituent dom estic entity submits the country -by-country report, all of the 
other constituent domestic entities shall be relieved of this requirement. If a constituent domestic entity is 
unable to submit the country -by-country report by the deadline stipulated in the f irst sentence of 
subsection (6) below, in particular because it cannot procure or produce the report, then it shall notify the 
Federal Central Tax Office accordingly by the deadline stipulated in the first sentence of subsection (6) 
below while at the same  time providing all of the information listed in subsection (2) above that it has at 
its disposal or that it can procure. If a constituent domestic entity had reason to presume that the 
country -by-country report would be submitted on time and it subsequent ly turns out that, through no fault 
of the constituent domestic entity, this did not occur, then the constituent domestic entity shall fulfil its 
obligations under the first or third sentences above within one month after the non -submission became 
known. T he first through fourth sentences above shall apply accordingly to a domestic permanent 
establishment of a foreign enterprise where such foreign enterprise is included in consolidated financial 
statements as a foreign group parent or as a constituent forei gn entity.  
(5) In its tax returns, a domestic enterprise shall state whether it is  
1.  a domestic group parent as defined in subsection (1) above,  
2.  a reporting entity, or  
3.  a constituent domestic entity in a group with a foreign group parent.  
In cases  where number 3 of the first sentence above applies, the domestic enterprise shall state which 
enterprise is submitting the country -by-country report and to which revenue authority the report is being 
submitted. If this information is not provided, the con stituent domestic entity itself shall be required to 
submit the country -by-country report by the stipulated deadline. The first through third sentences above 
shall apply accordingly to a domestic permanent establishment of a foreign enterprise where such 
foreign enterprise is included in consolidated financial statements as a foreign group parent or as a 
constituent foreign entity.  
(6) The country -by-country report shall be submitted to the Federal Central Tax Office no later than one 
year after the end of the financial year for which the country -by-country report is to be produced. In 
derogation of the first sentence above, cases to which the fourth sentence of subsection (4) above 
applies shall be subject to the deadline stipulated therein. The report shal l be submitted using an 
officially prescribed data set via remote data transmission.  
(7) The Federal Central Tax Office shall forward all of the country -by-country reports it has received to 
the respective competent revenue authorities. If a country -by-country report contains information, as 
defined in subsection (2) above, for a contracting state to international agreements, the Federal Central 
Tax Office shall forward the submitted country -by-country report to the competent authority of the 
respective con tracting state, on the basis of such international agreements. The Federal Central Tax 
Office shall receive the country -by-country reports that are forwarded to it by the competent authorities of 
the contracting states referred to in the second sentence ab ove, and shall forward such reports to the 
respective competent revenue authorities. The Federal Central Tax Office may review country -by-
country reports as part of its legally assigned responsibilities. The Federal Central Tax Office shall store 
the count ry-by-country reports electronically and shall delete them upon the expiration of the 15th year 
following the year of submission.  
Section 138b  
Obligations of third parties to notify revenue authorities of relationships between domestic 
taxpayers and third -country companies  
(1) Obligated parties as defined in section 2(1) numbers 1 to 3 and 6 of the Money Laundering Act 
(notifying entities) shall notify the tax office with local jurisdiction under sections 18 to 20 of any 
relationships they have established or facilitated between (a) domestic taxpayers as defined in the first 
sentence of section 138(2) and (b) third -country companies  as defined in section 138(3). This shall apply 
to cases where  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 60 of 141 1.  the notifying entity is aware that, on the basis of the relat ionship it has established or 
facilitated, the domestic taxpayer can for the first time exercise controlling or decisive influence, 
directly or indirectly, over the financial, business or company law related affairs of a third -country 
company, alone or joi ntly with related parties as defined in section 1(2) of the External Tax Relations 
Act, or  
2.  the domestic taxpayer obtains direct holdings totalling at least 30% of the third -country 
company’s capital or assets on the basis of the relationship establishe d or facilitated by the notifying 
entity; other acquisitions relating to the same third -country company shall be included in this 
calculation to the extent that the notifying entity is aware or should have been aware of such 
acquisitions.  
(2) Separate noti fications shall be submitted for each domestic taxpayer and each reportable 
circumstance.  
(3) The following information shall be provided for each domestic taxpayer:  
1.  the identification number as per section 139b and  
2.  the business identification numb er as per section 139c or, if a business identification 
number has not yet been issued and if the taxpayer is not a natural person, the tax number that 
applies for the taxation of income.  
If the notifying entity is unable to obtain (a) the identification n umber and (b) the business identification 
number or tax number, it shall instead provide a substitute form of identification that has been specified 
by the Federal Ministry of Finance in consultation with the highest revenue authorities of the Länder .  
(4) Notifications shall be submitted to the tax office by the end of February in the year following the 
calendar year during which the reportable circumstances occurred, using an officially prescribed form. 
Section 72a(4), section 93(1) no 3 and (4) to (7), s ection 171(10a), section 175b(1) and sectio n 203a 
shall apply accordingly.  
(5) The tax office with local jurisdiction over the notifying entity shall forward the notifications to the tax 
office with local jurisdiction over the domestic taxpayer in accordan ce with sections 18 and 20. Section 
31b shall remain unaffected.  
(6) The domestic taxpayer shall provide the notifying entity with  
1.  his identification number as per section 139b and  
2.  his business identification number as per section 139c or, if a bu siness identification 
number has not yet been issued and if the taxpayer is not a natural person, the tax number that 
applies for the taxation of income.  
Section 138c  
Authorisation to issue ordinances  
(1) The Federal Ministry of Finance may stipulate, by w ay of ordinances issued with the consent of the 
Bundesrat, that notifications under section 138b must be submitted using officially prescribed data sets 
and officially designated interfaces. Ordinances under the first sentence above may also stipulate that , 
notwithstanding the first sentence of section 138b(1), notifications must be transmitted to a different 
revenue authority, which must then forward such notifications to the tax office with local jurisdiction under 
sections 18 to 20.  
(2) If the Federal Mi nistry of Finance has issued an ordinance in accordance with subsection (1) above, 
notifying entities may ask the Federal Central Tax Office for the taxpayer’s identification number as per 
section 139b or the taxpayer’s business identification number as pe r section 139c. Such requests may 
list only the domestic taxpayer’s data specified in section 139b(3) or section 139c(3) to (5a), insofar as 
these data are known to the notifying entity. The Federal Central Tax Office shall disclose the 
identification numb er or business identification number to the notifying entity if the data transmitted by 
the notifying entity correspond to the data stored at the Federal Central Tax Office in accordance with 
section 139b(3) or section 139c(3) to (5a). The notifying entity  may use these identifiers only to the 
extent that such use is required in order to fulfil tax obligations. The Federal Ministry of Finance may 
specify the details of this procedure in ordinances issued with the consent of the Bundesrat.  
Section 139  
Regist ering operations in certain cases  
(1) Whoever seeks to acquire or manufacture goods, the acquisition, manufacture, removal from the 
manufacturing business or consumption within the manufacturing business of which entails a liability for 
tax on consumption,  shall register this with the competent revenue authority before operations are 
commenced. The same shall apply to whoever wishes to operate an enterprise to which special taxes on 
transactions apply.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 61 of 141 (2) Conditions with respect to the timing, form and con tent of the registration may be determined by way 
of ordinance. Such ordinances shall be issued by the Federal Government where transaction taxes are 
concerned, with the exception of aviation tax, and otherwise by the Federal Ministry of Finance. 
Ordinance s issued by the Federal Ministry of Finance shall require the consent of the Bundesrat only 
where beer duty is concerned.  
3rd Subchapter  
Identifier  
Section 139a  
Identifier  
(1) For the purposes of unambiguous identification in taxation procedures, the Feder al Central Tax Office 
shall issue each taxpayer a uniform and permanent means of recognition (identifier); the taxpayer, or 
third parties who must submit that taxpayer’s data to the revenue authorities, shall indicate this identifier 
on applications, decla rations or notifications addressed to revenue authorities. The identifier shall consist 
of a series of digits that may not be constructed or derived from other data relating to the taxpayer; the 
final digit shall be a check digit. Natural persons shall rec eive an identification number, and economic 
actors shall receive a business identification number. The taxpayer shall be informed without undue 
delay that he or she h as been assigned an identifier.  
(2) “Taxpayer” for the purposes of this subchapter shall m ean anyone who is liable for tax under a tax 
law. 
(3) “Economic actors” for the purposes of this subchapter shall mean:  
1.  natural persons who are economically active,  
2.  legal persons,  
3.  associations.  
Section 139b  
Identification number  
(1) A natural p erson may not receive more than one identification number. An identification number may 
only be issued once.  
(2) Revenue authorities may process identification numbers if such processing is necessary in order for 
them to fulfil the functions incumbent upon  them or if a legal provision expressly permits or prescribes 
the processing of identification numbers. Other public entities and non -public entities may, without the 
consent of the data subject,  
1.  process the identification number only insofar as (a) su ch processing is necessary for the 
purpose of transmitting data between them and revenue authorities or (b) a legal provision expressly 
permits or prescribes the processing of identification numbers,  
2.  organise or provide access to their filing systems on the basis of identification numbers only 
insofar as this is necessary for the regular transmission of data between them and revenue 
authorities,  
3. use the legally collected identification number of a taxpayer to fulfil all of their reporting 
requiremen ts vis -á-vis revenue authorities, as long as the respective reporting requirements relate to 
the same taxpayer and the processing of the identification number would be permissible under 
number 1 above,  
4.  use the identification number of a taxpayer, colle cted legally by an affiliated enterprise as 
defined in section 15 of the Stock Corporation Act or by a company in a bank group, to fulfil all of their 
obligations to cooperation with revenue authorities, as long as the respective obligation to cooperate 
relates to the same taxpayer, the entity using the identification number belongs to the same group of 
companies as the entity that collected the identification number, and the processing of the 
identification number would be permissible under number 1 above.  
Contract terms and declarations of consent which are designed to enable the collection or use of the 
identification number which is impermissible under the above conditions shall be deemed invalid.  
(3) The Federal Central Tax Office shall save with regard  to natural persons the following data:  
1.  identification number,  
2.  business identification number,  
3.  surname,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 62 of 141 4.  previous names,  
5.  first names,  
6.  doctor title,  
7.  (rescinded)  
8.  date and place of birth,  
9.  sex, 
10.  current or last known addr ess, 
11.  competent revenue authorities,  
12.  bans on transmission pursuant to the Registration Law Framework Act and the Länder  
legislation on registration.  
13. date of death.  
(4) The data listed in subsection (3) above shall be saved in order to  
1.  ensu re that a person has been issued with one identification number only, and that an 
identification number is not issued more than once,  
2.  determine the identification number of a taxpayer,  
3.  distinguish which revenue authorities are responsible for a tax payer,  
4.  be able to transfer to the competent offices data which, pursuant to supranational or 
international law, are to be received,  
5.  enable the revenue authorities to discharge their statutory responsibilities.  
(5) The data listed in subsection (3)  above may be processed only for the purposes specified in 
subsection (4) above. Bans on the disclosure of information under the Federal Registration Act must be 
complied with and communicated to other parties in cases where the transmission of data is per missible. 
The third party to whom the data are transmitted shall likewise comply with such bans on the disclosure 
of information.  
(6) When an identification number is to be issued for the first time, the registration authorities shall 
transmit to the Feder al Central Tax Office the following data for each resident registered in the 
population register as having sole or main residence in their jurisdiction:  
1.  surname,  
2.  previous names,  
3.  first names,  
4.  doctor title,  
5.  (rescinded)  
6.  date and place of birth,  
7.  sex, 
8.  current address of the sole residence or main residence.  
9. date of moving into and out of the residence,  
10. bans on the disclosure of information under the Federal Registration Act.  
For this purpose, the registration authorities sh all issue a provisional identifier for each resident 
registered as having sole or main residence in their jurisdiction. They shall transmit this provisional 
identifier, together with the data under the first sentence above, to the Federal Central Tax Offic e. 
Referencing this provisional identifier, the Federal Central Tax Office shall then notify the competent 
registration authority of the identification number issued to the taxpayer, so that this identification number 
can be stored in the register, and sha ll subsequently delete the provisional identifier.  
(7) Where data relating to a birth as well as data relating to a person for whom hitherto no identification 
number has been issued is saved, the registration authorities shall transmit to the Federal Centr al Tax 
Office the data pursuant to subsection (6), first sentence, above for the purposes of allocating the 
identification number. Subsection (6), second to sixth sentences, above shall apply accordingly.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 63 of 141 (8) The registration authority shall notify the Fed eral Central Tax Office of changes to the data referred to 
in subsection (6), first sentence, numbers 1 to 10 above as well as the date of death in the event of a 
death, indicating the identification number or, where this has not yet been allocated, the pr ovisional 
identifier.  
(9) The Federal Central Tax Office shall inform the registration authorities where it has specific reason to 
suspect the incorrectness of the data transmitted to it by the registration authorities.  
Section  139c  
Business identification  number  
(1) The business identification number shall be issued upon request of the competent revenue authority. 
It shall begin with the letters “DE”. A business identification number may only be issued once.  
(2) Revenue authorities may process business ide ntification numbers if such processing is necessary in 
order for them to fulfil the functions incumbent upon them or if a legal provision expressly permits or 
prescribes such processing. Other public entities and non -public entities may process business 
identification numbers only insofar as such processing is necessary for the purpose of fulfilling their tasks 
or business purposes or transmitting data between them and revenue authorities. If a business 
identification number replaces other numbers, legal pr ovisions regulating transmission by revenue 
authorities to other authorities shall remain unaffected.  
(3) The Federal Central Tax Office shall save with regard to natural persons who are economically active 
the following data:  
1.  business identification n umber,  
2.  identification number,  
3.  company name(sections 17 et seqq  of the Commercial Code) or name of the enterprise,  
4.  former company names or names of the enterprise,  
5.  legal form  
6.  industry branch number,  
7.  official municipal code,  
8.  addre ss of the enterprise, registered office,  
9.  entry in the register of companies (court of registration, date and number of entry),  
10.  date on which operations were opened or time of commencement of activity,  
11.  date on which operations were terminated or time of ceasing of activity,  
12.  competent revenue authorities.  
13. special identifiers in accordance with subsection (5a) below,  
14. information on affiliated enterprises.  
(4) The Federal Central Tax Office shall save with regard to legal persons the following data:  
1.  business identification number,  
2.  identifiers of the legal representatives,  
3.  company name  (sections 17 et seqq  of the Commercial Code),  
4.  former company names,  
5.  legal form  
6.  industry branch number,  
7.  official municipal cod e, 
8.  registered office pursuant to section 11, especially place of business management,  
9.  date of the act of foundation of enterprise,  
10.  entry in the register of companies, cooperatives or associations (court of registration, date 
and number of entr y), 
11.  date on which operations were opened or time of commencement of activity,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 64 of 141 12.  date on which operations were terminated or time of ceasing of activity,  
13.  date of liquidation,  
14.  data of removal from register,  
15.  associated enterprises,  
16.  competent revenue authorities.  
17. special identifiers in accordance with subsection (5a) below,  
(5) The Federal Central Tax Office shall store the following data on associations:  
1.  business identification number,  
2.  identifiers of the legal representa tives,  
3.  identifiers of the participants,  
4.  company name (sections 17 et seqq of the Commercial Code), or name of the association 
of persons,  
5.  former company names or names of the association,  
6.  legal form  
7.  industry branch number,  
8.  official municipal code,  
9.  registered office pursuant to section 11, especially place of business management,  
10.  date of the articles of partnership,  
11.  entry in the register of companies or partnerships (court of registration, date and number of 
entry),  
12.  date on which operations were opened or time of commencement of activity,  
13.  date on which operations were terminated or time of ceasing of activity,  
14.  date of liquidation,  
15.  date of termination,  
16.  data of removal from register,  
17.  associated  enterprises,  
18.  competent revenue authorities.  
19. special identifiers in accordance with subsection (5a) below,  
(5a) The business identification number of every economic actor (cf. section 139a(3)) shall be 
supplemented with a five -digit special identi fier for each of his economic activities, each of his 
businesses and each of his permanent establishments in order to enable the unambiguous identification 
of an economic actor’s activities, businesses and permanent establishments in taxation procedures. T he 
Federal Central Tax Office shall assign the special identifier 00001 to the first of an economic actor’s 
economic activities, businesses or permanent establishments. Each of an economic actor’s additional 
economic activities, businesses or permanent est ablishments shall be assigned a separate, 
consecutively numbered special identifier by the Federal Central Tax Office upon request by the 
competent revenue authority. The Federal Central Tax Office shall store the following data on each 
economic activity, each business or each permanent establishment of an economic actor:  
1. the special identifier,  
2. the economic actor’s business identification number,  
3. company name (cf. section 17 et seqq. of the Commercial Code) or name of the economic 
activity, busine ss or permanent establishment,  
4. former company names or former names of the economic activity, business or permanent 
establishment,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 65 of 141 5. legal form,  
6. industry branch number,  
7. official municipal code,  
8. address of the economic activity, business or per manent establishment,  
9. register entry (court of registration, date and number of entry),  
10. date on which the business or permanent establishment was opened or date on which the 
economic activity commenced,  
11. date on which the business or permanent es tablishment was closed or date on which the 
economic activity was terminated,  
12. date of removal from register,  
13. competent revenue authorities.  
(6) The data indicated in subsections (3) to (5a) above shall be saved in order to  
1.  ensure that a busines s identification number already issued is not used again for another 
economic actor,  
2.  determine the business identification number issued for an economic actor,  
3.  distinguish which revenue authorities are responsible,  
4.  allow the transfer to the co mpetent offices of data which, pursuant to supranational or 
international law, are to be received,  
5.  enable the revenue authorities to discharge their statutory responsibilities.  
(7) The data listed in subsection (3) above may be processed only for the purposes specified in 
subsection (6) above unless a legal provision expressly provides for other processing.  
Section 139d  
Authorisation to issue ordinances  
The Federal Government shall specify, by way of ordinances issued with the consent of the Bundesrat:  
1.  organisational and technical measures to ensure tax secrecy, especially to prevent 
unauthorised access to data protected by section 30,  
2.  guidelines on the issue of identification numbers pursuant to section 139b and the business 
identification numb ers pursuant to section 139c,  
3.  time limits upon whose expiration the data saved pursuant to sections 139b and 139c shall 
be deleted, and  
4.  the form of and the process of data transfer pursuant to section 139b(6) to (9).  
Second Chapter  
Obligations to c ooperate  
1st Subchapter  
The keeping of accounts and records  
Section 140  
Account -keeping and recording obligations deriving from other laws  
Whoever is obliged under laws other than tax laws to keep accounts and records of relevance for 
taxation shall be ob liged to fulfil the ob¬ligations imposed by such other laws in the interests of taxation 
as well.  
Section 141  
The obligation of certain taxpayers to keep accounts  
(1) Commercial traders as well as farmers and foresters who, according to the revenue authori ty’s 
findings, have had for the respective business  
1. transactions, including tax -free transactions but excluding transactions pursuant to section 4 
numbers 8 to 10 of the VAT Act, exceeding 600,000 euros in the calendar year, or  
2. (rescinded)  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 66 of 141 3. agricul tural and forest Land  which they managed themselves and whose economic value 
(section 46 of the Valuation Act) exceeds 25,000 euros or  
4. a profit from commercial operations of more than 60,000 euros in the financial year, or  
5. a profit from agricultural and forestry undertakings of more than 60,000 euros in the 
calendar year  
shall be obliged with respect to these operations to keep accounts and on the basis of annual inventories 
to draw up financial statements even if they are not required to keep account s under section 140. 
Sections 238, 240, 241, 242(1) and sections 243 to 256 of the Commercial Code shall apply mutatis 
mutandis  insofar as tax laws do not provide otherwise. In applying number 3 above, the economic value 
of all areas managed by the farmer or forester shall be decisive, irrespective of whether he owns them or 
not. 
(2) The obligation under subsection (1) above shall be fulfilled from the beginning of the financial year 
following disclosure of the notice through which the revenue authority ind icated the beginning of this 
obligation. The obligation shall end with the close of the financial year following the financial year in 
which the revenue authority determines that the conditions under subsection (1) above no longer exist.  
(3) The obligation  to keep accounts shall be transferred to any person who takes over management of 
the entire operations as owner or beneficial owner. An indication pursuant to subsection (2) above 
advertising the beginning of the obligation to keep accounts shall not be r equired.  
(4) Subsection (1) number 5 above in its current version shall apply to profit beginning in the calendar 
year 1980.  
Section 142  
Supplementary provisions for farmers and foresters  
Farmers and foresters who are obliged under section 141(1) numbers 1 , 3 or 5 to keep accounts shall 
maintain a list of crops in addition to their annual inventory and annual financial statement. The list of 
crops shall show the types of produce with which the self -managed Land  was cultivated in the foregoing 
financial year . 
Section 143  
Recording the receipt of goods  
(1) Commercial traders shall record the receipt of goods separately.  
(2) All goods, including the raw materials, works -in-progress, auxiliary materials and ingredients that the 
trader acquires as part of his co mmercial operations for further sale or for consumption, whether for a 
charge or free of charge, for his own account of for the account of others, shall be recorded; this shall 
also apply where the goods are to be processed or treated before their further sale or consumption. 
Goods which in keeping with the nature of the business are usually acquired for the business for further 
sale of for consumption shall be recorded even where they are used for purposes other than those of the 
business.  
(3) The records shall contain the following information:  
1. the date of receipt of the goods or the date of the invoice,  
2. the name or the company and the address of the supplier,  
3. the usual trade description of the good,  
4. the price of the good,  
5. a reference to the  receipt.  
Section 144  
Recording the exit of goods  
(1) Commercial traders who in keeping with the nature of their commercial business supply on a regular 
basis other commercial traders with goods for further sale or consumption as auxiliary material shall 
record separately the exit of goods recognisably destined for this purpose.  
(2) The trader shall also record all goods which he  
1. delivers on invoice (on credit, on account or by way of offset), by way of exchange or free of 
charge, or  
2. against cash paym ent where, because of the amount ordered, the good is sold at a price 
below the normal price for consumers.  
This shall not apply where the good is recognisably not destined for further commercial use.  
(3) The records shall contain the following informatio n: Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 67 of 141 1. the date of exit of the goods or the date of the invoice,  
2. the name or the company and the address of the customer,  
3. the usual trade description of the good,  
4. the price of the good,  
5. a reference to the receipt.  
(4) The trader shall issue for  the exit of every good named in subsections (1) and (2) above a receipt 
which contains the details listed in subsection (3) above as well as his name or the company and his 
address. This shall not apply to the extent that, pursuant to section 14(5) of the  VAT Act, a credit note is 
used in place of an invoice or simplifications are granted in accordance with section 14(6) of the VAT 
Act. 
(5) Subsections (1) to (4) above shall apply also with respect to farmers and foresters who are required 
by section 141 t o keep accounts.  
Section 145  
General specifications relating to the keeping of accounts and records  
(1) The accounts shall be kept in such a manner as to allow a competent third party to gain an overview 
of the business transactions and the enterprise’s st ate of affairs within a reasonable period of time. The 
business transactions shall be traceable with respect to their origin and course.  
(2) Records shall be kept such that the taxation purpose which they are intended to serve can be met.  
Section 146  
Forma l rules on the keeping of accounts and records  
(1) Accounting entries and other required records shall be made separately, completely, correctly, and in 
a timely and orderly manner. Cash receipts and payments shall be recorded on a daily basis. In the case  
of cash sales of goods to large numbers of unknown persons, there shall be no obligation to make 
separate account entries as stipulated in the first sentence above, on grounds of reasonableness. This 
shall not apply if the taxpayer uses an electronic reco rd-keeping system as described in section 146a.  
(2) Accounts and records otherwise required shall be kept and stored within the territory of application of 
this Code. This shall not apply to the extent that for permanent establishments outside the territor y of 
application of this Code local provisions provide for an obligation to keep accounts and records and this 
obligation is met. In such a case, as well as in the case of controlled companies outside the territory of 
application of this Code, the results of the foreign accounts shall be incorporated into the accounts of the 
German enterprise insofar as they are of relevance for taxation. In this regard, any adjustments required 
in order to satisfy the tax provisions within the territory of application of t his Code shall be undertaken 
and identified as such.  
(2a) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2), first sentence, above, the competent revenue 
authority may upon written application by the taxpayer authorise the keeping and storage of electronic 
accounts and other necessary electronic records or parts thereof outside the territory of application of 
this Code. The preconditions shall be that  
1. the taxpayer informs the competent revenue authority of the location of the data -processing 
system and, where commissioning a third party, provides the name and address thereof,  
2. the taxpayer has properly complied with his duties arising from sections 90, 93, 97, 140 to 
147 and 200(1) and (2),  
3. the access to data pursuant to section 147(6) is possible in  full, and  
4. taxation is not hampered hereby.  
Where the revenue authority becomes aware of circumstances leading to the hampering of taxation, it 
shall revoke the authorisation and require the retransfer without undue delay of the electronic accounts 
and other necessary electronic records to the territory of application of this Code. The competent 
revenue authority shall be informed without undue delay of a change in the circumstances specified 
under the second sentence, number 1 above.  
(2b) A fine for del ay ranging from 2,500 euros to 250,000 euros may be set where the taxpayer fails to 
comply with the request to retransfer his electronic accounts or to fulfil his duties pursuant to subsection 
(2a), fourth sentence, above to afford access to data pursuant to section 147(6), to furnish information or 
to submit requested documents within the meaning of section 200(1) in the course of an external audit 
within a reasonable period of time allowed to him for that purpose following notification by the competent 
revenue authority or where he has transferred his electronic accounts abroad without authorisation from 
the competent revenue authority.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 68 of 141 (3) The entries and records otherwise required shall be made in a modern language. Where a language 
other than German is used, the revenue authority may require translations. Where abbreviations, figures, 
letters or symbols are used, each of their meanings shall be clearly defined.  
(4) An entry or record may not be changed in such a manner as to render the original content n o longer 
determinable. Furthermore, changes may not be made if their nature renders it uncertain as to whether 
they were made at the time of original entry or at a later stage.  
(5) The accounts and the records otherwise required may also consist in the ord erly filing of vouchers or 
may be kept on data storage devices to the extent that these forms of book -keeping including the 
method used to this end are consistent with the principles of orderly accounting; with respect to records 
which are to be made solel y on the basis of tax laws, the permissibility of the method employed shall be 
determined on the basis of the purpose which the records are intended to serve for taxation. Where 
accounts and the records otherwise required are kept on data storage devices, it shall be ensured, in 
particular, that, during the retention period, the data are accessible at any time and can be rendered 
readable without undue delay. This shall also apply with respect to the powers of the revenue authority 
pursuant to section 147(6 ). Subsections (1) to (4) above shall apply mutatis mutandis . 
(6) These formal rules shall also apply where the trader keeps accounts and records of relevance for 
taxation without being obliged to do so.  
Section 146a  
Rules for accounting and record -keeping  using electronic record -keeping systems; authorisation 
to issue ordinances  
(1) Any person who uses an electronic record -keeping system to log business transactions or other 
procedures that require documentation shall use an electronic record -keeping syst em that records each 
such business transaction or other procedure separately, completely, correctly and in a timely and 
orderly manner. The electronic record -keeping system and digital records referred to in the first sentence 
above shall be protected usin g a certified technical security system. Such certified technical security 
systems must consist of a security module, a storage medium and a standardised digital interface. The 
digital records must be saved on the storage medium and must be kept available in electronic form for 
inspections and external audits. The commercial advertisement or marketing of (a) electronic record -
keeping systems, (b) software for such systems or (c) certified technical security systems that do not 
fulfil the requirements stipul ated in the first to third sentences above, and that are meant to be used for 
the purposes referred to in the first to third sentences above, shall be prohibited within this Code’s 
territory of applica tion. 
(2) Any person who logs business transactions req uiring documentation as described in the first 
sentence of subsection (1) above shall, at the time that the transaction occurs and without prejudice to 
other legal provisions, immediately issue a receipt for the transaction and make it available to the par ty 
involved in the transaction (obligation to issue receipts). In cases involving the sale of goods to large 
numbers of unknown persons, revenue authorities may use due discretion and, on grounds of 
reasonableness and in accordance with section 148, waive the obligation to issue receipts. This waiver 
may be revoked.  
(3) The Federal Ministry of Finance shall be authorised to stipulate, by way of ordinances issued with the 
consent of the Bundestag and Bundesrat and in consultation with the Federal Ministry of  the Interior and 
the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, rules on the following:  
1.  the electronic record -keeping systems that must include a certified technical security 
system, and  
2.  the requirements pertaining to  
a) the security module , 
b) the storage medium,  
c) the standardised digital interface,  
d) the electronic retention of records,  
e) protocols of basic digital records to ensure the integrity, authenticity and completeness of 
electronic records,  
f) receipts and  
g) the certification  of the technical security system.  
Fulfilment of the requirements under numbers 2a to 2c above shall be verified through certification by the 
Federal Office for Information Security, and such certification shall be maintained on a continuous basis. 
The Fed eral Office for Information Security may be tasked with specifying the technical security system Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 69 of 141 requirements referred to in numbers 2a to 2c above. Ordinances issued in accordance with the first 
sentence above shall be sent to the Bundestag. Such ordinanc es shall be sent to the Bundestag before 
they are sent to the Bundesrat. The Bundestag can consent to or reject the ordinance by passing a 
resolution. The Bundestag’s resolution shall be sent to the Federal Ministry of Finance. If the Bundestag 
has not del iberated on the ordinance following the expiration of three weeks of sittings after the 
ordinance was received, consent in accordance with the first sentence above shall be deemed granted 
and the ordinance shall be sent to the Bundesrat.  
(4) Any person wh o uses an electronic record -keeping system as described in subsection (1) above to 
log business transactions or other procedures that require documentation shall notify the tax office with 
local jurisdiction under sections 18 to 20 of the following, using an officially prescribed form:  
1.  the taxpayer’s name,  
2.  the taxpayer’s tax number,  
3.  the type of certified technical security system,  
4.  the type of electronic record -keeping system used,  
5.  the number of electronic record -keeping systems used,  
6.  the serial number of the electronic record -keeping system used,  
7.  the date when the electronic record -keeping system was procured,  
8.  the date when the electronic record -keeping system was taken out of operation.  
The notification in accordance with the  first sentence above shall be provided within a period of one 
month after the electronic record -keeping system was procured or taken out of operation.  
Section 146b  
Cash inspections  
(1) To verify whether cash receipts and cash payments are being properly recorded and accounted for, 
public officials so assigned by the revenue authorities may – during regular business and working hours, 
without advance notice and outside the framework of an external audit – enter the business properties 
and business premises  of taxpayers for the purpose of determining facts that may be relevant for 
taxation (cash inspection). Cash inspections may also include verifications of whether electronic record -
keeping systems are being used in accordance with the provisions of section  146a(1). Living quarters 
may be entered against the will of the occupier only in cases where this serves to prevent imminent risks 
to public security and order. The inviolability of the home (Article 13 of the Basic Law) shall be limited to 
this extent.  
(2) When requested to do so, taxpayers subject to cash inspections shall (a) furnish records, accounts 
and other cash management -related documents pertaining to the facts and time periods covered by the 
cash inspection, and (b) provide information, to the o fficial assigned to conduct the cash inspection, to 
the extent that this is necessary to determine relevance in accordance with subsection (1) above.  If the 
records or accounts referred to in the first sentence above exist in electronic form, the official shall be 
entitled to view them, to request that data be transmitted using the standardised digital interface, or to 
request that records and accounts be made available on a machine -readable data storage device in line 
with the specifications of the standar dised digital interface. The costs shall be borne by the taxpayer.  
(3) If the findings of a cash inspection provide grounds to do so, the cash inspection may be turned into 
an external audit in accordance with section 193 without the need for a prior audit  order. Notification that 
a cash inspection is being turned into an external audit shall be provided in writing.  
Section 147  
Formal rules on the retention of documents   
(1) The following documents shall be kept in good order:  
1. accounts and records, inven tories, annual financial statements, situation reports, the 
opening balance sheet as well as the operating instructions and other organisational documents 
needed for their comprehension,  
2. the trade or business letters received,  
3. reproductions of trade  or business letters sent,  
4. accounting records,  
4a. documents pursuant to Article 15(1) and Article 163 of the Union Customs Code;  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 70 of 141 5. other documents to the extent that these are of relevance for taxation.  
(2) With the exception of annual financial state ments, opening balance sheets and documents under 
subsection (1) number 4a above (insofar as such latter documents are official documents or informal 
preference documents that must be signed by hand), the documents listed under subsection (1) above 
may be kept as reproductions on picture storage devices or on other data storage devices if this is 
commensurate with the principles of orderly accounting and if it is ensured that the reproductions or the 
data 
1. correspond visually to the trade or business lett ers received as well as the accounting 
records, and correspond in terms of content to the other documents when they are rendered 
readable,  
2. may, throughout the duration of the retention period, be accessed at any time, rendered 
readable without delay and  analysed by automated means.  
(3) The documents specified in subsection (1) numbers 1, 4 and 4a above shall be retained for ten years 
and the other documents specified in subsection (1) above for six years, unless other tax laws permit 
shorter retention pe riods. Shorter retention periods under non -tax laws shall not affect the periods 
specified in the first sentence above. In the case of incoming delivery notes that are not accounting 
records as per subsection (4) number 1 above, the retention period shall end upon receipt of the invoice. 
In the case of outgoing delivery notes that are not accounting records as per subsection (4) number 1 
above, the retention period shall end upon shipment of the invoice. However, the retention period shall 
not expire if and  as long as the documents are relevant for taxes whose assessment period has not yet 
expired; section 169(2), second sentence, shall not apply.  
(4) The retention period shall begin upon the end of the calendar year in which the last entry was made 
in the a ccounts, the inventory, the opening balance sheet, the annual financial statement or the situation 
report drawn up, the trade or business letter received or sent, the accounting record created, the record 
made or the other documents created.  
(5) Persons wh o submit retainable documents in the form of a reproduction on a picture storage device 
or other data storage devices shall be required, at their own expense, to make available any auxiliary 
aids needed to render the documents readable; if the revenue auth ority so requests, they shall at their 
own expense print out without undue delay all or part of the documents or furnish reproductions that are 
readable without auxiliary aids.  
(6) If the documents under subsection (1) above have been created with the aid of a data processing 
system, the revenue authority shall have the right to view the stored data within the context of an 
external audit and to use the data processing system to examine these documents. The revenue 
authority may also request within the cont ext of an external audit that the data be analysed by computer 
in accordance with the revenue authority’s specifications or that the stored documents and records be 
made available on a machine -readable data storage device. If the taxpayer informs the reven ue authority 
that the data referred to in subsection (1) above are located at the premises of a third party, the third 
party shall  
1.  allow the revenue authority to view the data stored for the taxpayer or  
2.  analyse these data by computer in accordance with the revenue authority’s specifications or  
3.  make the documents and records stored for the taxpayer available on a machine -readable 
data storage device.  
The costs shall be borne by the taxpayer. In cases where the third sentence above applies, the of ficial 
assigned to conduct the external audit shall give suitably advance notice of his arrival to persons 
specified in section 3 and section 4 numbers 1 and 2 of the Tax Consultancy Act.  
Sectio n 147a  
Provisions for retaining the records and documents of c ertain taxpayers  
(1) Taxpayers whose sum of positive income under section 2(1) numbers 4 to 7 of the Income Tax Act 
(surplus income) exceeds 500,000 euros in a particular calendar year shall retain for six years the 
records and documents that pertain to th e income and income -related expenses underlying the surplus 
income. In cases of joint assessment, the sum of each spouse’s or civil partner’s positive income under 
the first sentence above shall be used to determine whether the amount of 500,000 euros has been 
exceeded. The obligation under the first sentence above must be fulfilled from the beginning of the 
calendar year following the calendar year in which the sum of positive income as described under the 
first sentence above exceeds 500,000 euros. The ob ligation under the first sentence above shall end 
with the expiration of the fifth consecutive year in which the conditions specified in the first sentence 
above have not been fulfilled. Section 147(2), 147(3), third sentence, and 147(4) to (6) shall apply  
accordingly. The first to third and fifth sentences above shall apply accordingly in cases where the Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 71 of 141 competent revenue authority requires the taxpayer to, in the future, retain the records and documents 
referred to in the first sentence above because he h as failed to comply with his obligation to cooperate 
under section 90(2), third sentence.  
(2) Taxpayers who, alone or jointly with related parties as defined in section 1(2) of the External Tax 
Relations Act, can exercise controlling or decisive influence,  directly or indirectly, over the financial, 
business or company law related affairs of a third -country company as defined in section 138(3), shall 
retain for six years the records and documents that pertain to this relationship and all associated income 
and expenses. This retention requirement shall be complied with from the date when circumstances 
meeting the criteria specified in the first sentence above first occur. The fourth sentence of subsection 
(1) above and section 147(2), 147(3), third sentence, 147(5) and 147(6) shall apply accordingly.  
Section 148  
The authorisation of simplifications  
For individual cases or for certain categories of cases, revenue authorities may permit the accounting, 
recording and retention requirements laid down in tax laws t o be eased if compliance with such 
requirements causes undue hardship and if easing the requirements does not have an adverse impact 
on taxation. The easing of requirements in accordance with the first sentence above may be authorised 
retroactively. Such a uthorisation may be revoked.  
2nd Subchapter  
Tax returns  
Section 149  
Filing tax returns  
(1) Tax laws shall specify the persons obliged to file a tax return. In addition, any person requested by 
the revenue authority to file a tax return shall be obliged to do so. The request may be made by way of 
public announcement. The obligation to file a tax return shall continue to apply even if the revenue 
authority has estimated the tax base in accordance with section 162.  
(2) Unless otherwise required under tax law, tax returns relating to a calendar year or to a legally 
specified period of time shall be filed no later than seven months after the end of the calendar year or 
seven months after the legally specified period of time. In the case of taxpayers who calculate  their 
profits from agricultural and forestry activities on the basis of a financial year that deviates from the 
calendar year, the filing period shall not end before the expiration of the seventh month following the end 
of the financial year that began in  the calendar year.  
(3) Insofar as persons, companies, associations, authorities or corporations as described in sections 3 
and 4 of the Tax Consultancy Act are commissioned with the preparation of  
1.  income tax returns in accordance with section 25(3) of  the Income Tax Act, with the 
exception of income tax returns described in section 46(2) number 8 of the Income Tax Act,  
2.  corporation tax returns in accordance with section 31(1) and (1a) of the Corporation Tax 
Act, tax base determination returns in acc ordance with section 14(5), the fourth sentence of section 
27(2), the fourth sentence of section 28(1) or the second sentence of section 38(1) of the Corporation 
Tax Act, corporation tax apportionment returns in accordance with section 6(7) of the Tax Reve nue 
Reallocation Act,  
3.  returns to determine the base amount of trade tax or apportionment returns in accordance 
with section 14a of the Trade Tax Act,  
4.  VAT returns for the calendar year in accordance with section 18(3) of the VAT Act,  
5.  returns fo r the (a) separate or (b) separate and joint determination of income subject to 
corporation tax or income tax in accordance with section 180(1), first sentence, number 2 in 
conjunction with section 181(1) and (2),  
6.  returns for the separate determinatio n of tax bases in accordance with the “Ordinance on 
the separate determination of tax bases” adopted in accordance with section 180(2) or  
7.  returns for the separate determination of tax bases in accordance with section 18 of the 
External Tax Relations Ac t,  
such returns shall be filed no later than the last day of February or, in cases where the second sentence 
of subsection (2) above applies, 31 July of the second calendar year following the tax period, subject to 
the provisions of subsection (4) below.  
(4) A tax office may order that the returns referred to in subsection (3) above must be filed prior to the 
last day of February in the second calendar year following the tax period if  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 72 of 141 1. with respect to the taxpayer in question,  
a) returns for the previous  tax period were not filed or were filed late,  
b) retroactive prepayments for the previous tax period were imposed for the previous tax 
period within a period of three months prior to the filing of the tax return or within a period of 
three months prior to  the start of interest accrual under section 233a(2), first sentence,  
c) prepayment amounts for the tax period were reduced outside of an assessment 
procedure,  
d) the assessment for the previous tax period led to a final payment of at least 25 percent 
of the assessed tax or more than 10,000 euros,  
e) the tax assessed on the basis of a tax return as described in subsection (3) numbers 1, 2 
or 4 above is likely to lead to a final payment of more than 10,000 euros or  
f) an external audit is planned,  
2. the ta xpayer in question has established or discontinued a business during the tax period or  
3.  losses have been incurred by persons with holdings in companies or partnerships.  
A deadline of four months following the issuance of the order shall be set for compl ying with the order. 
Furthermore, tax offices may, on the basis of automated random selection, order that the returns referred 
to in subsection (3) above must be filed prior to the last day of February in the second calendar year 
following the tax period, with a deadline of four months following issuance of the order. Orders issued in 
accordance with the third sentence above shall indicate that they are based on an automated random 
selection; no further explanation shall be required. In cases where the seco nd sentence of subsection (2) 
above applies, 31 July of the second calendar year following the tax period shall apply instead of the last 
day of February. An order issued in accordance with the first or third sentence above may not set a 
shorter deadline f or filing the return than the deadline stipulated in subsection (2) above. In cases where 
the first or third sentence above applies, an order shall cover all returns referred to in subsection (3) that 
the taxpayer in question must file for the same tax per iod or tax date.  
(5) Subsection (3) above shall not apply to VAT returns for the calendar year, if the commercial or 
professional activity ceased prior to or with the expiration of the tax period.  
(6) The highest revenue authority of a Land , or the Land  revenue authority it designates, may authorise 
persons, companies, associations, authorities or corporations as described in sections 3 and 4 of the 
Tax Consultancy Act to file by certain deadlines a certain percentage of returns as referred to in 
subsection  (3) above. If returns as described in subsection (3) above are included in a procedure under 
the first sentence above, the third sentence of subsection (4) shall not apply. The arrangement of 
procedures under the first sentence above shall lie within the discretionary power of the highest revenue 
authorities of the Länder  and shall not be actionable.  
Section 150  
Format and content of tax returns  
(1) A tax return must be filed using an officially prescribed form if  
1.  an electronic tax return is not prescr ibed,  
2.  a legally or officially permitted electronic tax return is not filed,  
3.  an oral or implied tax return is not permitted and  
4.  the documentation of an oral tax return filing at a tax office in accordance with section 151 
does not come into cons ideration.  
Section 87a(1), first sentence, shall apply only if an electronic tax return is prescribed or permitted. The 
taxpayer shall calculate the tax in the tax return himself where this is required by law (self -assessed tax 
return).  
(2) The information  contained in the tax returns shall be the truth to the best of the declarant’s knowledge 
and belief.  
(3) Where the tax laws require the taxpayer to sign the tax return personally, signature by an authorised 
party shall be permissible only where the taxpa yer’s physical or mental health or his extended absence 
prevents him from signing. A personal signature may be subsequently required where such hindrance 
ceases to exist.  
(4) The tax returns shall be accompanied by the documents required by the tax laws. T hird parties shall 
be obliged to issue any certificates required for this purpose.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 73 of 141 (5) Tax return forms may include questions that, in addition to tax -related documents, are necessary for 
statistical purposes under the Tax Statistics Act. Revenue authoriti es may also require information from 
taxpayers that is necessary to implement the Federal Training Assistance Act. In verifying the 
information, the revenue authorities shall have the same powers as those it has when clarifying matters 
relevant for taxatio n. 
(6) In order to facilitate and simplify the automated taxation procedure, the Federal Ministry of Finance 
may, by way of ordinances issued with the consent of the Bundesrat, determine whether and under 
which conditions tax returns or other data necessar y for the taxation procedure may be transmitted, 
wholly or partly, via remote data transfer or on machine -readable data storage devices. Ordinances may 
enact rules that differ from the provisions contained in section 72a and sections 87b to 87d. Ordinances  
shall not require the consent of the Bundesrat where they concern motor vehicle tax, aviation tax, 
insurance tax, or excise duties with the exception of beer duty.  
(7) If tax returns that are filed using (a) officially prescribed forms, or (b) officially prescribed data sets via 
remote data transmission, can lead to a fully automated tax assessment in accordance with the first 
sentence of section 155(4), then the tax return shall include a section or data field that gives taxpayers 
the opportunity to provi de information that in their view establishes cause for processing by officials.  
Data transmitted to the revenue authorities by notifying entities in accordance with section 93c shall be 
deemed to have been provided by the taxpayer, insofar as the taxpayer  provides no information to the 
contrary in a section or data field to be included for this purpose in the tax return.  
(8) Where the tax laws require that the revenue authority may, upon application to avoid undue hardship, 
waive a transmission of the tax return using an officially prescribed data set via remote data 
transmission, such an application shall be complied with where a submission of the return using an 
officially prescribed data set via remote data transmission is economically or personally unre asonable for 
the taxpayer. This shall in particular be the case where the creation of the technical means for a remote 
data transmission of the officially prescribed data set would be possible only at considerable financial 
expense or where the taxpayer’s individual knowledge and skills mean he is unable or not fully able to 
use the means of remote data transmission.  
Section 151  
Documentation of an oral tax return filing at a tax office  
A tax return that is to be filed in writing or electronically may be f iled orally and documented at the offices 
of the competent revenue authority in cases where, due to personal circumstances, the taxpayer cannot 
reasonably be expected to transmit the return electronically or file it in written form, and particularly in 
cases where the taxpayer is not able to complete a self -assessment on his own or have the self -
assessment done by a third party.  
Section 152  
Late -filing penalty  
(1) Any person who fails to comply with the requirement to file a tax return, or who fails to do s o on time, 
may be charged a late -filing penalty. No late -filing penalty shall be charged if the person required to file 
the return plausibly explains that the delay is excusable; if the failure to fulfil the requirement is the fault 
of a representative or aide, the fault shall be attributed to the person required to file the return.  
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) above, a late -filing penalty shall be charged if a tax return relating to a 
calendar year or a legally specified period of time is not filed  
1.  within 14 months after the end of the relevant calendar year or within 14 months after the 
end of the tax period,  
2.  within 19 months after the end of the relevant calendar year or within 19 months after the 
end of the tax period in cases where the se cond sentence of section 149(2) applies or  
3.  by the deadline specified in an order issued in accordance with section 149(4).  
(3) Subsection 2 shall not apply  
1.  if the revenue authority extends the deadline for filing the tax return in accordance with 
section 109 or extends this deadline retroactively,  
2.  if the assessed tax equals zero or a negative amount,  
3.  if the assessed tax does not exceed the sum of assessed prepayments and withheld taxes 
to be credited or  
4.  to annual wages tax returns.  
(4) If multiple persons are required to file a tax return, the revenue authority may decide, at its discretion, 
whether it will charge the late -filing penalty to one of the persons required to file the return, to some of Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 74 of 141 the persons required to file the return  or to all of the persons required to file the return. If the late -filing 
penalty is charged to some or all of the persons required to file the return, these persons shall be jointly 
liable for the penalty. In cases where section 180(1), first sentence, nu mber 2a applies, the late -filing 
penalty is to be charged first and foremost to the persons required to file a return under section 181(2), 
second sentence, number 4.  
(5) Subject to the second sentence below, subsection (8) below, and the second sentence o f subsection 
(13) below, the late -filing penalty shall be 0.25 percent of the assessed tax for each month or part of a 
month that a return is late, and no less than 10 euros per month or part of a month that a return is late. 
For tax returns relating to a calendar year or to a legally specified period of time, the late -filing penalty 
shall be 0.25 percent of the assessed tax, less the sum of assessed prepayments and withheld taxes to 
be credited, for each month or part of a month that a return is late, and no less than 25 euros for each 
month or part of a month that a return is late. If, after the statutory deadline has expired, revenue 
authorities request for the first time that a person submit a tax return by a deadline specified in the 
request, and if, up  until he receives the request, the taxpayer can assume that he is not required to 
submit a tax return, then the late -filing penalty shall be calculated only for each month or part of a month 
that follows the expiration of the deadline specified in the req uest.  
(6) Subsections (1) to (3) and the first two sentences of subsection (4) above shall apply accordingly to 
returns for the separate determination of tax bases, returns to determine the base amount of trade tax 
and apportionment returns, subject to sub section (7) below. The late -filing penalty shall be 25 euros for 
every month or part of a month that a return is late.  
(7) The late -filing penalty on returns for the separate determination of earnings subject to income tax or 
corporation tax shall be 0.062 5 percent of the assessed sum of positive income for each month or part of 
a month that a return is late, and no less than 25 euros for each month or part of a month that a return is 
late. 
(8) Subsection (5) above shall not apply to tax returns that must b e filed on a quarterly or monthly basis 
or to wages tax returns that must be filed on an annual basis in accordance with the second half -
sentence of the second sentence of section 41(2) of the Income Tax Act. In these cases, the frequency 
of missed deadlin es, the length of time by which such deadlines were missed, and the amount of tax due 
shall be taken into account when assessing the amount of the late -filing penalty.  
(9) In cases where a tax return is not filed, the late -filing penalty shall be calculate d for a period of time 
that extends to the end of the date when the initial tax assessment takes effect. The same shall apply to 
the failure to file a return to determine the base amount of trade tax, an apportionment return and a 
return for the separate d etermination of tax bases.  
(10) Late -filing penalties shall be rounded down to the nearest euro and shall not exceed 25,000 euros.  
(11) Late -filing penalties shall be charged in conjunction with the issuance of a tax assessment notice, a 
notice specifying  the base amount of trade tax or an apportionment notice; in cases where subsection (4) 
applies, they can be charged in conjunction with a notice of determination.  
(12) If (a) an assessment of a tax or base amount of trade tax, (b) an apportionment notice or (c) a 
separate determination of tax bases is cancelled, then any late -filing penalty charged in connection 
therewith shall also be cancelled. If (a) an assessment of a tax, (b) the crediting of prepayments or 
withheld taxes or (c) a separate determinati on of earnings subject to income tax or corporation tax (as 
referred to in subsection (7) above)  is amended, withdrawn or revoked, or corrected in accordance with 
section 129, then any late -filing penalty charged in connection therewith shall be reduced or  increased 
accordingly insofar as the minimum penalty amounts do not apply following the amendment or 
correction.  This shall not apply to loss carry -backs as defined in section 10d(1) of the Income Tax Act or 
events with retroactive effect as described in section 175(1), first sentence, number 1 or section 175(2).  
(13) Subsection (2), the second sentence of subsection (4), the second sentence of subsection (5) and 
subsection (8) above shall not apply to tax returns that must be filed with main customs offic es, subject 
to the second sentence above. The second sentence of subsection (8) above shall apply accordingly to 
the assessment of late -filing penalties for avia tion tax returns.  
Section 153  
Correction of returns  
(1) Where a taxpayer subsequently realises before the period for assessment has elapsed  
1. that a return submitted by him or for him is incorrect or incomplete and that this can lead or 
has already led to an understatement of tax, or  
2. that a tax amount payable by way of tax mark or tax stamp was not paid in the correct 
amount,  
he shall be obliged to indicate such without undue delay, and to effect the necessary corrections. This 
obligation shall also concern the taxpayer’s universal successor and the persons acting for the universal 
successor or the taxpayer pursuant to sections 34 and 35.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 75 of 141 (2) The notification obligation shall further apply where the conditions for tax exemption, tax reduction or 
other tax privileges subsequently cease to exist, whether in full or in part.  
(3) In the case of goods  for which a tax privilege has been granted subject to specific conditions, any 
person who wishes to use such goods in a manner that does not comply with the specified conditions 
shall be obliged to notify the revenue authority accordingly in advance.  
3rd Subchapter  
Authenticity of accounts  
Section 154  
Authenticity of accounts  
(1) No one may use a false or fictitious name, for themselves or for a third party, to open an account or 
cause entries to be made in an account, place in safe custody or pledge valu ables (money, securities, 
precious items) or procure a safe deposit box.  
(2) Any person or entity that holds accounts, keeps valuables in safe custody or as a pledge, or issues 
safe deposit boxes (obligated party) shall  
1.  verify in advance the identity a nd address of each person with power of disposal and each 
beneficial owner as defined in the Money Laundering Act and  
2.  record the relevant information in suitable form, in the case of an account in the account 
itself.  
If a person with power of disposal is a natural person, section 11(4) number 1 of the Money Laundering 
Act shall apply accordingly. Obligated parties shall ensure that they are able at all times to provide 
revenue authorities with information on the accounts or safe deposit boxes over which  a person has 
power of disposal or on the valuables that a person has placed in safe custody or given as a pledge. 
Such business relations shall be monitored on a continuous basis and the data that are to be collected 
under the first sentence above shall b e updated at appropriate intervals of time.  
(2a) In addition, credit institutions shall collect and record the following data for each account holder, 
each other person with power of disposal and each beneficial owner as defined in the Money Laundering 
Act: 
1.  the identification number as per section 139b and  
2.  the business identification number as per section 139c or, if a business identification 
number has not yet been issued and if the taxpayer is not a natural person, the tax number that 
applies for the taxation of income.  
Contracting parties and any persons acting on their behalf shall provide credit institutions with the data to 
be collected under the first sentence above and shall notify credit institutions without delay of any 
changes that occur d uring the period of the business relationship. The first and second sentences above 
shall not apply to credit accounts if the credit provided serves the sole purpose of financing private 
consumer goods and the credit line does not exceed the amount of 12,0 00 euros.  
(2b) If, by the time the business relationship is established, the contracting party or any person acting on 
his behalf fails to provide the credit institution with a data subject’s identification number that is to be 
collected under subsection (2a), first sentence, number 1 above and the credit institution has not 
rightfully obtained such data subject’s identification number on other grounds, the credit institution shall 
use an automated procedure to request the identification number from the Fe deral Central Tax Office 
within a period of three months following the establishment of the business relationship. Only the data 
subject’s data specified in section 139b(3) may be included in the request. The Federal Central Tax 
Office shall provide the cr edit institution with the data subject’s identification number insofar as the data 
submitted by the credit institution match the data stored by the Federal Central Tax Office in accordance 
with section 139b(3).  
(2c) If, due to a lack of cooperation from th e contracting party or any persons acting on his behalf, the 
credit institution cannot ascertain the data to be collected under the first sentence of subsection (2a) 
above, the credit institution shall record this fact on the account. In such cases, the cr edit institution shall 
notify the Federal Central Tax Office of the accounts concerned, together with the data it has collected 
for such accounts in accordance with subsection (2) above; these data are to be submitted, for all such 
accounts opened during a  given calendar year, by February of the following year.  
(2d) For individual cases or for certain categories of cases, revenue authorities may permit the 
requirements under subsections (2) to (2c) above to be eased if compliance with such requirements 
caus es undue hardship and if easing the requirements does not have an adverse impact on taxation.  
(3) In the event that subsection (1) above is contravened, credit balances, valuables and the contents of 
safe deposit boxes may be returned only with the consent  of the tax office responsible for assessing the 
income and corporation tax of the person who has power of disposal.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 76 of 141 Third Chapter  
Assessment and determination procedures  
1st Subchapter  
Tax assessment  
I. General provisions  
Section 155  
Tax assessment  
(1) U nless otherwise prescribed, the taxes shall be assessed by the revenue authority by way of tax 
assessment notice. The tax assessment notice shall be the administrative act disclosed pursuant to 
section 122(1). This shall also apply with respect to the comp lete or partial exemption from a tax and for 
the dismissal of an application for tax assessment.  
(2) A tax assessment notice may be issued even where a basic assessment notice has not yet been 
issued.  
(3) Where several taxpayers owe the tax as joint and se veral debtors, consolidated tax assessment 
notices may be issued against them. Administrative acts on ancillary tax payments or other claims to 
which this Code applies may be issued against one or more taxpayers in combination with consolidated 
tax assessm ent notices. This shall also apply where the legal relationship between the taxpayers is such 
that assessed taxes, ancillary tax payments or other claims are not to be borne by all participants.  
(4) Based on the information at their disposal and the inform ation furnished by the taxpayer, revenue 
authorities may use fully automated processes to conduct, correct, withdraw, revoke, cancel or amend 
(a) tax assessments as well as (b) credits of withheld taxes and prepayments, provided there is no cause 
for an in dividual case to be processed personally by an official.  This also applies to  
1.  the issuance, correction, withdrawal, revocation, cancellation or amendment of 
administrative acts associated with such (a) tax assessments or (b) credits of withheld taxes a nd 
prepayments and   
2.  the attachment of ancillary provisions in accordance with section 120 to (a) tax 
assessments or (b) credits of withheld taxes and prepayments, provided that such ancillary provisions 
constitute a generalised order issued on the basi s of administrative instructions from the Federal 
Ministry of Finance or the highest revenue authorities of the Länder .  
Cause for processing by an official shall exist in particular in cases where the taxpayer provides 
information in a section or data fie ld included for this purpose in the tax return, as described in section 
150(7). In cases where an administrative act is issued using a fully automated process, the decision -
making process regarding its issuance and disclosure shall be deemed completed at t hat point in time 
when the automated processing is finished.  
(5) The provisions that apply to tax assessments shall apply mutatis mutandis  to the assessment of tax 
rebates.  
Section 156  
Refraining from tax assessment  
(1) In order to simplify administration,  the Federal Ministry of Finance may prescribe by way of ordinance 
that a tax shall not be assessed if the actual amount to be assessed is unlikely to exceed a certain 
amount to be specified by the respective ordinance. The amount to be specified in accord ance with the 
first sentence above may not exceed 25 euros. The same shall apply to the amendment of a tax 
assessment if the difference between an amended assessment and the previous assessment would not 
exceed the amount specified in the respective ordina nce. Ordinances shall not require the consent of the 
Bundesrat where they concern motor vehicle tax, aviation tax, insurance tax, import and export duties, or 
excise duties with the exception of beer duty.  
(2) The assessment of a tax and ancillary tax paym ents, and the amendment of such assessments, may 
be waived even for amounts exceeding 25 euros if it is expected that  
1.  the collection of the amount in question will be unsuccessful or  
2.  the costs of assessment and the costs of collection are dispropor tionate to the amount in 
question.  
The highest revenue authorities may issue instructions for applying number 2 under the first sentence 
above to identified or identifiable categories of cases, with such instructions being uniform nationwide. 
Such instruct ions may not be made public if doing so could jeopardise the consistency and lawfulness of 
taxation. For taxes administered by Land  revenue authorities on behalf of the Federation, the highest 
Land  revenue authorities shall, in consultation with the Federa l Ministry of Finance, devise these Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 77 of 141 instructions with a view towards ensuring that the execution of tax laws is co nsistent on a nationwide 
basis.  
Section 157  
Form and content of tax assessment notices  
(1) Unless otherwise specified, tax assessment notices shall be issued in written or electronic form. They 
shall identify the type and amount of the assessed tax and indicate the person who owes the tax. 
Furthermore, they shall be accompanied by instructions on applicable legal remedies, the deadline for 
seeki ng remedies, and the authority to which a request for remedy is to be filed.  
(2) The determination of the tax base shall constitute a part of the tax assessment notice not separately 
contestable by legal remedy where the tax base is not determined separate ly. 
Section 158  
Validity of accounts  
The accounts and records of the taxpayer which correspond to the provisions of sections 140 to 148 
shall serve as the basis for taxation to the extent that the individual circumstances give no reason to 
object to their formal correctness.  
Section 159  
Proof of fiduciary status  
(1) Whoever claims to own or possess rights in his name or items in his possession merely as trustee, 
representative of a third party, or pledgee shall be required upon request to prove to whom the rights or 
items belong; failure to do so shall result in their being routinely attributed to him. This shall not have the 
effect of restricting the right of the revenue authority to investigate the matter.  
(2) Section 102 shall remain unaffected.  
Section 1 60 
Naming creditors and the recipients of payments  
(1) Debts and other burdens, business expenditure, income -related expenses and other expenses shall 
as a matter of routine not be considered for tax purposes where the taxpayer does not meet the 
demands of  the revenue authority to provide precise details of the names of the creditors or recipients. 
The right of the revenue authority to investigate the matter shall remain unaffected.  
(2) Section 102 shall remain unaffected.  
Section 161  
Inventory shortfalls  
Where, within the context of a prescribed or officially conducted inventory, shortfalls are determined with 
respect to goods subject to excise duty, it shall be assumed that an excise duty has arisen with respect 
to the missing goods or that a conditional e xcise duty has become unconditional where it cannot be 
established credibly that the missing goods are the result of circumstances for which tax would not have 
to be paid and which do not cause a conditional tax to become unconditional. In case of doubt, t he tax 
shall be deemed to have arisen or become unconditional at the point in time at which the inventory is 
carried out.  
Section 162  
Estimating tax bases  
(1) Where the revenue authority cannot determine or calculate the tax base, the revenue authority sha ll 
estimate it. All circumstances which have an impact on the estimate shall be taken into account.  
(2) An estimate shall be undertaken in particular where the taxpayer is not willing to provide sufficient 
explanation regarding his details or refuses to gi ve further information or a sworn statement or breaches 
his obligation to cooperate pursuant to section 90(2). The same shall apply where the taxpayer cannot 
furnish accounts or records which he is obliged under tax laws to keep, where the accounts or the 
records cannot be used as a basis for taxation pursuant to section 158 or where there are factual 
indications of the incorrectness or incompleteness of the details provided by the taxpayer on taxable 
income or business asset increases and the taxpayer fail s to give his consent pursuant to section 93(7), 
first sentence, number 5. Where the taxpayer breaches his obligation to cooperate under section 90(2), 
third sentence, it shall be refutably assumed that taxable income in states or territories within the 
meaning of section 90(2), third sentence exists or is higher than the income declared.  
(3) If a taxpayer breaches his obligation to cooperate under section 90(3) by failing to submit records of a 
business transaction or if the business transaction records su bmitted are essentially of no use, or if it is 
determined that he has not compiled records as described in the eighth sentence of section 90(3) in a 
timely manner, it shall be rebuttably presumed that his taxable income in Germany – which the records 
descr ibed in section 90(3) serve to determine – is higher than the income he declared. If in such cases 
the revenue authority must conduct an estimate and if this income can be determined only within a 
certain range – and in particular only on the basis of a pr ice band – then the unfavourable limit of that Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 78 of 141 range may be selected to the detriment of the taxpayer. If, despite the submission of usable records by 
the taxpayer, there are indications that the application of the arm’s length principle would cause the 
taxpayer’s income to be higher than the income declared on the basis of the submitted records, and if 
corresponding doubts cannot be cleared up because a foreign related party fails to fulfil its obligation to 
cooperate under section 90(2) or its obligation to provide information under section 93(1), the second 
sentence above shall apply accordingly.  
(4) If a taxpayer fails to submit records as described in section 90(3) for a business transaction, or if the 
records submitted for a business transaction are es sentially of no use, a penalty of 5,000 euros shall be 
imposed. The penalty shall be at least 5 percent and at most 10 percent of the additional income that 
results from a correction carried out on the basis of subsection (3) above, if this leads to a pena lty of 
more than 5,000 euros. In cases where usable records are submitted late, the penalty shall total up to 
1,000,000 euros, and shall be at least 100 euros for each full day following the expiration of the deadline. 
Insofar as the revenue authorities ar e given discretion in determining the penalty amount, their decision 
shall take into account not only the objective of inducing taxpayers to compile and punctually submit 
records as described in section 90(3), but also, and in particular, the benefits deri ved by the taxpayer 
and, in the case of late submission, the length of time by which the deadline has been missed. No 
penalty shall be imposed in cases where the non -fulfilment of obligations under section 90(3) appears to 
be excusable or the degree of fau lt is negligible. Fault on the part of a legal representative or aide shall 
be deemed the fault of the taxpayer. As a rule, the penalty shall be imposed after the completion of an 
external audit.  
(5) In cases where section 155(2) applies, the tax bases to be specified in a basic assessment notice 
may be estimated.  
Section 163  
Divergent assessment of taxes on grounds of equity  
(1) Tax bills may be set at a lower amount, and individual tax bases that would increase taxes may be 
excluded from the tax assessmen t, if levying the tax would be inequitable under the circumstances of the 
individual case. In the case of income tax, it may be permissible, with the taxpayer’s consent, for 
individual tax bases that would increase taxes to be included in a later assessmen t, and for individual tax 
bases that would reduce taxes to be included in an earlier assessment.  
(2) Measures taken on grounds of equity in accordance with subsection (1) above may be carried out in 
conjunction with the relevant tax assessment.  
(3) In case s where subsection (2) above applies, a measure taken on grounds of equity in accordance 
with subsection (1) above is always subject to revocation if it  
1.  is not explicitly issued as an autonomous decision by the revenue authority,  
2.  is taken in conjun ction with a tax assessment subject to review in accordance with section 
164  
3.  is taken in conjunction with a provisional tax assessment in accordance with section 165 
and the reason for the provisional character of the assessment is also relevant for t he decision taken 
under subsection (1) above.  
In cases where number 1 above applies, a measure taken on grounds of equity shall no longer be 
subject to revocation once the deadline passes for assessing the tax to which the measure applies. In 
cases where n umber 2 above applies, a measure taken on grounds of equity shall no longer be subject 
to revocation once the tax assessment to which the measure applies is no longer subject to review. In 
cases where number 3 above applies, a measure taken on grounds of e quity shall no longer be subject 
to revocation once the tax assessment to which the measure applies becomes final.  
(4) If a measure taken on grounds of equity under subsection (1) above and subject to revocation under 
subsection (3) above is unlawful, it s hall be withdrawn with retroactive effect. Section 130(3), first 
sentence, shall not apply in this case.  
Section 164  
Tax assessment subject to review  
(1) As long as the tax case has not been subject to a final audit, taxes may be assessed generally, or in 
certain cases provisionally subject to review, without justification being required. Assessment of a 
prepayment shall always be a tax assessment subject to review.  
(2) The tax assessment may be cancelled or amended for as long as the review proviso remains  in 
effect. The taxpayer may apply for the cancellation or amendment of the tax assessment at any time. 
However, the relevant decision may be deferred until a final audit of the tax case, which shall be 
undertak en within a suitable timeframe.  
(3) The revie w proviso may be cancelled at any time. Such cancellation shall be equivalent to a tax 
assessment not subject to review; section 157(1), first and third sentences, shall apply mutatis mutandis . Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 79 of 141 The proviso shall be cancelled if, following an external audit , there are no changes  to the tax assessment 
subject to review.  
(4) The review proviso shall no longer apply in the event that the period for assessment expires. Section 
169(2), second sentence, section 170(6) and section 171(7), (8) and (10) shall not app ly. 
Section 165  
Provisional tax assessments, suspension of tax assessments  
(1) A tax may be assessed provisionally where there is uncertainty as to whether the prerequisites 
required for the tax to come into effect have been met. This provision shall also apply where  
1. there is uncertainty as to whether and when agreements with other states on taxation 
(section 2) which have a positive effect for the taxpayer come into effect with respect to the 
assessment of taxes,  
2. the Federal Constitutional Court has determined the incompatibility of a tax law with the 
Basic Law of Germany and the legislator is obliged to make new provisions,  
2a. due to a decision by the Court of Justice of the European Union, there may be a need to 
adopt new legislative provisions,  
3. the compatibility of a tax law with primary law is the subject of proceedings before the Court 
of Justice of the European Union, the Federal Constitutional Court or a highest federal court, or  
4. the interpretation of a tax law is the subject of proceedin gs before the Federal Fiscal Court.  
The scope of and reason for the provisional character shall be indicated. Given the preconditions of the 
first and second sentences above, the tax assessment can also be suspended against or without 
provision of collate ral. 
(2) The revenue authority may cancel or amend a tax assessment to the extent that it has assessed the 
tax on a provisional basis. When the uncertainty has been cleared up, a provisional tax assessment shall 
be cancelled, amended or declared final; any  suspended tax assessment shall be subsequently 
continued. In the cases outlined in subsection (1), second sentence, number 4 above, the uncertainty 
shall cease as soon as it clear that the principles of the Federal Fiscal Court’s ruling apply generally 
above and beyond the individual case ruled on. In the cases outlined in subsection (1), second sentence, 
above a provisional tax assessment pursuant to the second sentence above shall be declared final only 
upon application by the taxpayer when it cannot be cancelled or amended.  
(3) A provisional tax assessment may be issued in conjunction with a tax assessment subject to review.  
Section 166  
Third party effects of the tax assessment  
Where the tax has been incontestably assessed with respect to the taxpayer, i n addition to a universal 
successor, anyone who would have been in a position to contest the assessment notice issued against 
the taxpayer as his representative, authorised nominee or by virtue of his own rights shall also be 
obliged to accept the validity  of this.  
Section 167  
Self-assessed tax return, use of tax marks or tax stamps  
(1) Where a tax has to be self -assessed as a result of a statutory obligation (section 150(1), third 
sentence), an assessment of the tax pursuant to section 155 shall be require d only where the 
assessment leads to a divergent tax or the persons owing the tax or liability do not submit the self -
assessed tax return. The first sentence above shall apply mutatis mutandis  where because of a statutory 
obligation the tax is to be paid b y applying tax marks or tax stamps. Where following an external audit 
within the meaning of section 193(2) number 1 the person owing the tax or liability recognises in writing 
his obligation to pay, such recognition shall be deemed equal to a self -assessed  tax return.  
(2) Self -assessed tax returns shall also be deemed to have been submitted on time when they are 
received by the responsible payments office with the time period allowed. This shall not apply to 
import/export duties and excise duties.  
Section 1 68 
Effects of a self -assessed tax return  
A self -assessed tax return is equal to a tax assessment subject to review. Where the self -assessed tax 
return results in a reduction in the tax payable up to that point or to a tax rebate, the first sentence above 
shall apply only if the revenue authority agrees. The agreement shall not require a particular form.  
II. Period of limitation for the assessment  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 80 of 141 Section 169  
Period for assessment  
(1) A tax assessment and its cancellation or amendment shall no longer be perm issible once the period 
for assessment has expired. This shall also apply to corrections of obvious errors under section 129. The 
time limit for assessing a tax shall be deemed complied with if, before the per iod for assessment has 
expired,  
1.  the tax ass essment notice or, in cases where section 122a applies, the electronic 
notification has left the domain of the revenue authority responsible for assessing the tax or  
2.  the assessment has been disclosed or published in cases of public notification pursuan t to 
section 10 of the Administrative Service of Documents Act.  
(2) The period for assessment shall be:  
1. one year for excise duties and excise duty rebates,  
2. four years for taxes and tax rebates that are not the taxes referred to under number 1 above 
or are not tax rebates under Article 5 numbers 20 and 21 of the Union Customs Code.  
The period for assessment shall be ten years where taxes have been evaded and five years where they 
have been recklessly understated. This shall also apply where the tax e vasion or reckless 
understatement of tax has not been committed by the tax debtor or a person of whose services he avails 
himself to meet his tax obligations, unless the tax debtor shows that his wealth has not increased as a 
result of the act and that thi s act was not brought about by his omission to take the due precautions 
necessary to prevent an understatement of tax.  
Section 170  
Beginning of the period for assessment  
(1) The period for assessment shall begin at the end of the calendar year in which th e tax has arisen or a 
conditional tax has become unconditional.  
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) above, the period for assessment shall begin  
1. where a tax return or a self -assessed tax return is to be submitted or a notice posted, at  the 
end of the calendar year in which the tax return, the self -assessed tax return or the notice is 
submitted, at the latest however at the end of the third calendar year following the calendar year in 
which the tax has arisen, unless subsection (1) above  prescribes that the period for assessment shall 
begin later,  
2. where a tax that is to be paid by way of tax marks or tax stamps, at the end of the calendar 
year in which tax marks or tax stamps have been used for the tax case, at the latest however at t he 
end of the third calendar year following the calendar year in which the tax marks or tax stamps should 
have been used.  
This shall not apply to excise duties, excluding energy tax on natural gas and electricity duty.  
(3) Where a tax or tax rebate is asse ssed upon application only, the period for the cancellation or 
amendment of this assessment or its correction pursuant to section 129 shall not begin before the end of 
the calendar year in which the application is made.  
(4) Where by application to capital tax or real property tax of subsection (2) number 1 above the date of 
commencement of the period for assessment is postponed, the date of commencement of the period for 
assessment for the subsequent calendar years of the main assessment period shall be pos tponed by the 
same amount of time.  
(5) The period for assessment pursuant to subsection (1) or (2) above with respect to inheritance tax (gift 
tax) shall not begin  
1. for acquisition by reason of death, before the end of the calendar year in which the 
transferee has become aware of the transfer,  
2. for endowment, before the end of the calendar year in which the endower has died or the 
revenue authority has become aware of the endowment executed,  
3. for transfer of property for particular purpose between li ving persons, before the end of the 
calendar year in which the obligation has been met.  
(6) The period for assessing tax on income from capital that  
1. is derived from states or territories that are not members of the European Union or the 
European Free T rade Association, and  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 81 of 141 2. is not automatically reported in accordance with agreements within the meaning of section 
2(1) or arrangements based on such agreements,  
shall begin no earlier than the end of the calendar year in which such income from capital was  disclosed 
to the revenue authorities through a declaration by the taxpayer or by other means, but no later than ten 
years after the end of the calendar year in which the tax was incurred.  
(7) For taxes on income or gains stemming from relationships with t hird-country companies as defined in 
section 138(3) over which a taxpayer can directly or indirectly exercise controlling or decisive influence, 
alone or jointly with related parties as defined in section 1(2) of the External Tax Relations Act, the 
period for assessment shall begin no earlier than the end of the calendar year in which these 
relationships were disclosed through a notification by the taxpayer or through other means, but no later 
than ten years after the end of the calendar year in which the t ax was incurred.  
Section 171  
Suspension of expiration  
(1) The period for assessment shall not expire for as long as the tax assessment cannot be undertaken 
within the last six months of the period as a result of force majeure . 
(2) If an obvious error has o ccurred in the issuance of a tax assessment notice, the period for 
assessment shall not end before the expiration of one year following the disclosure of such tax 
assessment notice. The same shall apply in the cases referred to in section 173a.  
(3) Where a n application for tax assessment, or cancellation of or amendment to a tax assessment, or its 
correction pursuant to section 129, is made outside of objection proceedings or legal proceedings, the 
period for assessment shall not expire before an incontesta ble decision has b een reached on the 
application.  
(3a) Where a tax assessment notice is contested by way of objection proceedings or legal proceedings, 
the period for assessment shall not expire before an incontestable decision has been reached on the 
legal remedy; this shall also apply where the action is first brought when the period for assessment has 
expired. The expiration of the period for assessment shall be suspended with regard to the entire tax 
claim; this shall not apply where the legal remedy is  impermissible. In the cases of sections 100(1), first 
sentence, 100(2), second sentence, 100(3), first sentence, and 101 of the Code of Procedure for Fiscal 
Courts, a decision on the legal remedy shall become incontestable only once a tax assessment notic e 
issued on the basis of the aforementioned provisions has become incontestable.  
(4) Where an external audit is commenced before the period for assessment has expired or where its 
commencement is postponed upon application by the taxpayer, the period for a ssessment of the taxes in 
relation to which the external audit has been initiated or, in the case of a postponed audit, is to be 
initiated, shall not expire before the tax assessment notices to be issued on the basis of the external 
audit have become incon testable or before three months have expired following disclosure of the 
notification pursuant to section 202(1), third sentence. This shall not apply where an external audit is 
interrupted immediately after its commencement for a period of more than six m onths for reasons for 
which the revenue authority bears responsibility. The period for assessment shall end at the latest when 
the periods named in section 169(2) have ended since expiration of the calendar year in which the final 
meeting has taken place o r, in the absence of such, since expiration of the calendar year in which the 
last investigations as part of the external audit have taken place; a suspension of expiration pursuant to 
other provisions shall remain unaffected.  
(5) Where the customs investi gation offices or the offices of the revenue authorities of a Land  charged 
with tax investigations begin the process of calculating tax bases for the taxpayer before expiration of the 
period for assessment, the period for assessment shall not expire before  the tax assessment notices to 
be issued on the basis of the calculations have become incontestable; subsection (4), second sentence, 
above shall apply mutatis mutandis . The same shall apply where the taxpayer has been informed before 
expiration of the per iod for assessment of the initiation of criminal tax proceedings or administrative fine 
proceedings as a result of a tax -related administrative offence; section 169(1), third sentence, shall apply 
mutatis mutandis . 
(6) Where an external audit of the taxpay er cannot be carried out in the territory of application of this 
Code, the expiration of the period for assessment shall also be suspended by other investigative actions 
within the meaning of section 92 until the tax assessment notices issued on the basis of these 
investigations have become incontestable. The suspension of expiration shall only then become 
effective, however, where the taxpayer has been informed of the commencement of investigations under 
the first sentence above before the period for asses sment has expired; section 169(1), third sentence, 
shall apply mutatis mutandis . 
(7) In the cases mentioned in section 169(2), second sentence, the period for assessment shall not end 
before the period of limitation for prosecution of the tax crime or tax -related administrative offence has 
become time -barred.  
(8) Where pursuant to section 165 the assessment of a tax has been suspended or the tax has been 
provisionally assessed, the period for assessment shall not end before expiration of one year after the  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 82 of 141 uncertainty has been removed and the revenue authority has been informed of such. In the cases 
referred to in section 165(1), second sentence, the period for assessment shall not end before expiration 
of two years after the uncertainty has been removed an d the revenue authority has been informed of 
such.  
(9) Where the taxpayer posts notification pursuant to sections 153, 371 and 378(3) before the period for 
assessment has expired, the period for assessment shall not end before expiration of one year follow ing 
receipt of the notification.  
(10) To the extent that a notice of determination, a base tax amount notice or another administrative 
measure is binding (basic assessment notice) for the assessment of a tax, the period for assessment 
shall not end before the expiration of two years following the disclosure of such a basic assessment 
notice. If the authority responsible for issuing such a basic assessment notice is not a revenue authority 
as defined in section 6(2), the period for assessment shall not end b efore the expiration of two years 
following the date when the revenue authority responsible for issuing the follow -up notice obtained 
knowledge of the issuance of the basic assessment notice. For basic assessment notices to which 
section 181 does not apply , the first and second sentences above shall apply only if an application for 
such a basic assessment notice was submitted to the competent authority prior to the expiration of the 
assessment period for the follow -up notice. If the expiration of the assess ment period is suspended 
pursuant to subsection (4) above for that part of the tax that is not bound by the basic assessment 
notice, the assessment period for that part of the tax that is bound by the basic assessment notice shall 
not end before the expira tion of the period suspended pursuant to subsection (4) above.  
(10a) If, as described in section 93c, taxpayer data are received by the revenue authorities within seven 
calendar years following the tax period or tax date, the period for assessment shall no t end before the 
expiration of two years following receipt of such data.  
(11) Where a person incapable of contracting or with limited ability to contract has no legal 
representative, the period for assessment shall not end before expiration of six months a fter the date on 
which the person acquires unlimited ability to contract or the lack of representation is remedied. The 
shall also apply to the extent that a custodian has been appointed for a person and reservation of 
consent pursuant to section 1903 of t he Civil Code has been ordered, but the custodian has died or in 
some other manner is no longer available or is prevented from representing the person on legal grounds.  
(12) Where a tax is imposed on an inheritance, the period for assessment shall not end before expiration 
of six months after the date on which the inheritance is assumed by the heir or insolvency proceedings 
have been initiated with respect to the inheritance, or from which the tax can be assessed against a 
representative.  
(13) Where, before  expiration of the period for assessment, a tax which has not yet been assessed is 
registered in insolvency proceedings, the period for assessment shall not end before expiration of three 
months after the insolvency proceedings have been concluded.  
(14) T he period for assessment for a tax claim shall not end for as long as the period of limitations for an 
associated refund claim pursuant to section 37(2) has not become time -barred (section 228).  
(15) In the event that a third party must withhold and remit taxes on behalf of a tax debtor or must pay 
taxes on behalf of a tax debtor, the assessment period that applies to the tax debtor shall not end prior to 
the expiration of the assessment period that applies to the party obliged to pay the tax.  
III. Finality  
Section 172  
Cancelling and amending tax assessment notices  
(1) A tax assessment notice, to the extent that it has not been issued provisionally or subject to review, 
may be cancelled or amended only  
1. where it concerns excise duties,  
2. where it concerns  taxes other than import and export duties pursuant to Article 5 numbers 
20 and 21 of the Union Customs Code or excise duties,  
a) provided that the taxpayer agrees or the essence of his application is met; however, this 
shall apply to the benefit of the ta xpayer only to the extent that he has agreed or submitted 
the application before the period for objection has expired or to the extent that the revenue 
authority remedies objection proceedings or legal proceedings,  
b) to the extent that it has been issued by an authority which is not responsible,  
c) to the extent that it has been effected by dishonest means such as fraudulent 
misrepresentation, threat or bribery,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 83 of 141 d) to the extent that this is otherwise permitted by l aw; sections 130 and 131 shall not 
apply.  
This shall also apply where the tax assessment notice has been confirmed or amended by a ruling on an 
objection. The first sentence of number 2(a) above shall likewise apply in the cases mentioned in the 
second sentence above where the taxpayer has agreed  or submitted the application before the period 
for legal proceedings has expired; declarations and evidence which pursuant to section 364b(2) were not 
admitted in the objection ruling shall not be taken into account thereby.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall  also apply to an administrative act with which an application for a tax 
assessment notice to be issued, cancelled or amended has been rejected in full or in part.  
(3) Pending applications for the cancellation or amendment of a tax assessment that are made  outside of 
objection proceedings or legal proceedings which concern a legal issue ruled on by the Court of Justice 
of the European Union, the Federal Constitutional Court or the Federal Fiscal Court and which cannot be 
granted following the conclusion of the proceedings before these courts may be rejected by way of a 
general order. Section 367(2b), second to sixth sentences, shall apply accordingly.  
Section 173  
Cancelling or amending tax assessment notices as a result of new facts or evidence  
(1) Tax asses sment notices shall be cancelled or amended  
1. where facts or evidence which lead to a higher tax are subsequently ascertained,  
2. where facts or evidence which lead to a lower tax are subsequently ascertained and the fact 
that these facts or evidence are only ascertained subsequently is not due to grave negligence on the 
part of the taxpayer. Negligence shall be inconsequential where the facts or evidence have a direct or 
indirect connection to the facts or evidence within the meaning of number 1 above.  
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) above, tax assessment notices, to the extent that 
they have been issued on the basis of an external audit, may be cancelled or amended only where taxes 
have been evaded or recklessly understated. This shal l also apply where notification pursuant to section 
202(1), third sentence, has been issued.  
Section 174  
Conflicting tax assessments  
(1) Where a particular circumstance has been taken into account to the detriment of one or more 
taxpayers in more than one tax assessment notice despite the fact that such circumstance should have 
been taken into account only once, the incorrect tax assessment notice shall be cancelled or amended 
upon application. Where the deadline for this tax assessment has already passed, an application may 
still be submitted for up to one year after the last of the tax assessments in question has become 
incontestable. Where the application is made on time, there shall be no deadline imposed for the 
cancellation or amendment of the tax asse ssment notice.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall apply mutatis mutandis  where a particular circumstance has been taken 
into account more than once to the benefit of one or more taxpayers in an incompatible manner; an 
application shall not be required. However , it shall be possible to correct the incorrect tax assessment 
notice only where the circumstance was taken into account on the basis of an application or declaration 
by the taxpayer.  
(3) Where it is obvious that a particular circumstance has not been take n into account in a tax 
assessment notice because it was assumed that it is to be taken into account in another tax assessment 
notice and where this assumption transpires to be incorrect, the tax assessment which did not take the 
circumstance into account may be subsequently carried out, cancelled or amended. The subsequent 
carrying out, cancellation or amendment shall be permissible only until the period for assessment which 
applies to the other tax assessment expires.  
(4) Where as a result of incorrect ap praisal of a particular circumstance a tax assessment notice has 
been issued which, as the result of an appeal or otherwise upon application by the taxpayer, is cancelled 
or amended by the revenue authority to his benefit, the proper taxation implications of the circumstance 
may subsequently be effected by issuing or amending a tax assessment notice. This shall also apply 
where the tax assessment notice is cancelled or amended by the court. The expiration of the period for 
assessment shall be inconsequentia l where the taxation implications are effected within one year 
following cancellation or amendment of the incorrect tax assessment notice. This shall apply solely under 
the conditions outlined in subsection (3), first sentence, above where the period for a ssessment had 
already expired when the tax assessment notice which has been subsequently cancelled or amended 
was issued.  
(5) Subsection (4) above shall apply with respect to third parties where they were involved in the 
proceedings which led to the incorr ect tax assessment notice being cancelled or amended. Their 
enlistment in or summons to these proceedings shall be permissible.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 84 of 141 Section 175  
Amending tax assessment notices based on basic assessment notices and events with 
retroactive effect  
(1) A tax asses sment notice shall be issued, cancelled or amended  
1. to the extent that a basic assessment notice (section 171(10)) which has a binding effect on 
this tax assessment notice is issued, cancelled or amended,  
2. to the extent that an event which entails tax implications on periods already elapsed occurs 
(event with retroactive effect).  
In the cases mentioned in the first sentence, number 2, above the period for assessment shall begin 
upon expiration of the calendar year in which the event occurs.  
(2) The cess ation of a precondition bestowing a tax privilege shall also be deemed to be an event with 
retroactive effect where it is legally determined that this precondition must be met for a certain amount of 
time or where an administrative act has determined that it forms the basis for granting the tax privilege. 
The subsequent issue or submission of a certification or confirmation shall not be deemed to be an event 
with retroactive effect.  
Section 175a  
The implementation of mutual agreement understandings  
A tax as sessment notice shall be issued, cancelled or amended where this is required in order to 
implement a mutual agreement understanding or an arbitral award pursuant to an agreement within the 
meaning of section 2. The period for assessment shall not end befor e expiration of one year after the 
mutual agreement understanding or arbitral award has come into effect.  
Section 175b  
Amending tax assessment notices based on transmissions of data from third parties  
(1) A tax assessment notice shall be cancelled or amend ed if data transmitted to revenue authorities by 
notifying entities in accordance with section 93c were not accounted for or were accounted for 
incorrectly.  
(2) If data transmitted to revenue authorities by notifying entities in accordance with section 93c  are 
deemed to have been provided by the taxpayer as per the second sentence of section 150(7), tax 
assessment notices shall be cancelled or amended to the extent that such data are incorrect to the 
taxpayer’s detriment.  
(3) If data transmitted to revenue authorities in accordance with section 93c can be considered for tax 
purposes only if the taxpayer consents to the transmission of such data, then tax assessment notices 
shall be cancelled or amended to the extent that such consent has not been granted.  
(4) Subsections (1) and (2) above shall not apply if subsequently transmitted data as described in 
section 93c subsections (1) and (3) have no legal relevance.  
Section 176  
Protection of confidence in cancelling and amending tax notices of assessment  
(1) Wher e a tax assessment notice is cancelled or amended, the following may not be taken into account 
if it is to the taxpayer’s disadvantage:  
1. the Federal Constitutional Court determines the invalidity of a law upon which the tax 
assessment was based,  
2. a hig hest federal court does not apply a provision, upon which the tax assessment was 
based, because it holds it to be unconstitutional,  
3. a ruling of a highest federal court, which was applied by the revenue authority in the tax 
assessment, has changed.  
Wher e the court rulings up to that point had already been taken into account in a tax return or self -
assessed tax return without this having been recognisable by the revenue authority, number 3 above 
shall apply only where it can be assumed that the revenue au thority would have applied the standing 
case law had they been aware of the circumstances.  
(2) Where a tax assessment notice is cancelled or amended, it may not be taken into account if it is to 
the taxpayer’s disadvantage that a general administrative pro vision of the Federal Government, a 
highest federal authority or a highest authority of a Land  has been classified by a highest federal court as 
being incompatible with current law.  
Section 177  
Correction of material errors  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 85 of 141 (1) Where the conditions for can celling or amending a tax assessment notice to the taxpayer’s 
disadvantage exist, those material errors which are not the cause of the cancellation or amendment shall 
be corrected to the taxpayer’s advantage or disadvantage insofar as the amendment is suff icient.  
(2) Where the conditions for cancelling or amending a tax assessment notice to the taxpayer’s 
advantage exist, those material errors which are not the cause of the cancellation or amendment shall be 
corrected to taxpayer’s advantage or disadvantage  insofar as the amendment is sufficient.  
(3) Material errors within the meaning of subsections (1) and (2) above shall be all errors, including 
obvious errors within the meaning of section 129, which lead to the assessment of a tax which deviates 
from the tax which arose by application of law.  
(4) Section 164(2), section 165(2) and section 176 shall remain unaffected.  
IV. Costs  
Section 178  
Costs of making special  use of the customs authorities  
(1) The authorities of the federal customs administration and th e authorities to whom execution of the 
tasks of the federal customs administration has been transferred may charge fees and demand that 
expenses are refunded in the case of a special use or service (official act for which fee must be paid).  
(2) A special use or service within the meaning of subsection (1) above shall mean, in particular,  
1. official acts carried out outside of the place of work and outside of office hours, to the extent 
that these are not fiscal supervision measures,  
2. official acts which  make the execution of duties more difficult because, according to the 
application, they are to be carried out at a specific time,  
3. the inspection of goods where  
a) this is the result of an application to have binding tariff information issued, or a tax rebate 
or other privileges granted, or  
b) in the course of official inspections, details or objections of the person with power of 
disposal turn out to be incorrect or unfounded, or  
c) the inspected goods do not meet the required standards,  
4. monitoring measures in businesses and with regard to transactions, where such measures 
are in response to contraventions of the ordinances issued to secure the tax revenue,  
5. official monitoring and accompaniment of means of transportation or goods,  
6. the safekeepi ng of non -Community goods,  
7. the preparation of written documents, electronic documents, transcripts and copies as well 
as the electronic transmission or printing of electronic documents and other files, if such tasks are 
performed upon request,  
8.  the d estruction of goods carried out in an official capacity or upon application.  
(3) The Federal Ministry of Finance shall be authorised to issue ordinances not requiring the consent of 
the Bundesrat that specify in detail the official acts for which a fee may  be charged, that assess and set 
flat rates for the costs to be charged on the basis of the average administrative effort such acts require, 
and that define the conditions under which all or some of these costs may be waived due to negligibility, 
undue har dship or other similar reasons.  
(4) The provisions which apply to excise duties shall apply accordingly to the assessment of the costs. 
The Administrative Costs Act, in the version in force until 14 August 2013, shall otherwise apply to these 
costs. Sectio ns 18 to 22 of the Administrative Costs Act, in the version in force until 14 August 2013, 
shall not apply.  
Section 178a  
Costs of making special use of the revenue authorities  
(1) The Federal Central Tax Office shall charge fees for processing applications  for the implementation 
of a procedure of mutual understanding pursuant to an agreement within the meaning of section 2 with a 
view to the consensual taxation of as yet unrealised transactions of the taxpayer with related persons 
within the meaning of sect ion 1 of the Foreign Tax Act or with a view to the future consensual distribution 
of profits between a domestic enterprise and its foreign permanent establishment or with a view to the 
future consensual determination of profits of a domestic permanent esta blishment of a foreign enterprise 
(advance pricing agreement procedure), which fees shall be determined by the Federal Central Tax Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 86 of 141 Office before the advance pricing agreement procedure is opened. This procedure shall be opened by 
the first written correspo ndence sent to the other country. Where an application has as its goal an 
advance pricing agreement procedure with several states, a fee shall be determined and charged for 
each procedure. The advanced pricing agreement procedure shall not be opened before  the assessment 
of fees has become incontestable and the fee has been paid; where an application for a lower fee 
pursuant to subsection (4) below has been made, the decision relating to this must also first be 
incontestable.  
(2) The fee shall be 20,000 eu ros (basic fee) for each application within the meaning of subsection (1) 
above; an application of a parent company within the meaning of section 14(1) of the Corporation Tax 
Act which includes the corresponding transactions of its controlled companies sha ll be deemed to be one 
application. Where a person who has already entered a mutual agreement understanding applies for an 
extension to the period of validity, the fee shall be 15,000 euros (extension fee). Where the applicant 
amends his application before  a decision has been taken on the original application or where he applies 
for an amendment to the mutual agreement understanding while it is ongoing, an additional fee of 10,000 
euros shall be levied for each amendment (amendment fee); this shall not appl y where the amendment 
has been ordered by the Federal Central Tax Office or by the other state.  
(3) Where the total value of the transactions covered by the advance pricing agreement procedure are 
not likely to exceed the amounts given in section 6(2), fir st sentence, of the Ordinance of 13 November 
2003 on Recording Profit Allocations (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 2296), the basic fee shall be 10,000 
euros, the extension fee 7,500 euros and the amendment fee 5,000 euros.  
(4) The Federal Central Tax Office ma y reduce the fees under subsection (2) or (3) above upon 
application where their payment means unreasonable hardship for the taxpayer and the Federal Central 
Tax Office determines that the revenue authorities have a particular interest in the implementatio n of the 
advance pricing agreement procedure. The application shall be submitted before the advance pricing 
agreement procedure is opened; any application submitted at a later stage shall not be permissible.  
(5) Where the application is withdrawn or reject ed, or where the advance pricing agreement procedure 
fails, the incontestable fee set shall not be refunded.  
2nd Subchapt er 
Separate determination of tax bases, assessment of base amounts of non -personal taxes  
I. Separate determination  
Section 179  
Determin ation of tax bases  
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 157(2), tax bases shall be determined separately by way of 
notice of determination where this is stipulated in this Code or in other tax laws.  
(2) A notice of determination shall be issued a gainst the taxpayer to whom the object of the 
determination is attributable for taxation. Separate determination shall be undertaken uniformly against 
several participants where this is required by statute or where the object of the determination is 
attrib utable to several persons. Where one of these persons participates in the object of the 
determination solely via another person, a special separate determination may be undertaken.  
(3) Where a determination which should have been made does not appear in a notice of determination, it 
shall be in cluded in an additional notice.  
Section 180  
Separate determination of tax bases  
(1) The following, in particular, shall be determined separately:  
1. the assessed values in accordance with the Valuation Act,  
2. 
a) income which is subject to income tax and corporation tax, and other related tax bases 
where several persons have a share in the income and the income is attributable for tax 
purposes to these persons,  
b) in cases other than those mentioned in a) above, income  from agriculture and forestry, 
business or self -employment where, given the situation at the end of the period for 
determining profit, the tax office responsible for separate determination is not also 
responsible for taxes on income,  
3. the value of asset s subject to capital tax (sections 114 to 117a of the Valuation Act) and the  
value of debts and other deductions (section 118 of the Valuation Act), where the assets , debts and 
other deductions are attributable to several persons and such determination is  relevant for taxation.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 87 of 141 If, in cases where number 2(b) of the first sentence above applies, the circumstances establishing local 
jurisdiction have changed following expiration of the period for calculating profits, local jurisdiction shall 
be based on the provisions of section 18(1) numbers 1 to 3 in conjunction with section 26 also for 
determination periods that precede the change in such circumstances.  
(2) In order to ensure that the law is applied uniformly to similar situations, and in order to simplify  the 
taxation procedure, the Federal Ministry of Finance may stipulate, by way of ordinances issued with the 
consent of the Bundesrat, that tax bases are to be determined separately and, for several persons, 
jointly in cases other than those mentioned in s ubsection (1) above. In particular, such ordinances may 
specify the following:  
1. the object and scope of the separate determination,  
2. the conditions necessary for the determination procedure,  
3. the local jurisdiction of the revenue authorities,  
4. the participants in the determination procedure (procedure participants) and the scope of 
their obligations and rights for taxation purposes, including the representation of participants by other 
participants,  
5. the disclosure of administrative acts to proced ure participants and persons authorised to 
take receipt of such,  
6. the permissibility, scope and implementation of external audits to calculate tax bases.  
The Federal Ministry of Finance may stipulate, by way of ordinances issued with the consent of the 
Bundesrat, that tax bases which do not have effect until a later point in time are to be determined 
separately and, for several persons, jointly in order to ensure correct taxation at a later date; the second 
sentence above shall apply accordingly. Such or dinances shall not require the consent of the Bundesrat 
where they concern import/export duties and excise duties, with the exception of beer duty.  
(3) Subsection (1), first sentence, number 2a above shall not apply if  
1.  only one of the persons with a sh are of the income is subject to income tax or corporation 
tax in this Code’s territory of application, or  
2.  the case is one of negligible importance, in particular because the amount and its allocation 
have been specified; this shall apply mutatis mutand is to the cases described in subsection (1), first 
sentence, numbers 2a and 3 above.  
The tax office with local jurisdiction under section 18(1) number 4 may issue a notice stating that a 
separate determination is not to be carried out. This notice shall co unt as a tax assessment notice.  
(4) Furthermore, subsection (1), first sentence, number 2a above shall not apply to consortia whose sole 
purpose is to fulfil a single contract for work and services or contract for work and materials.  
(5) Subsection (1), fi rst sentence, number 2, subsection (2) and subsection (3) above shall apply 
accordingly insofar as  
1.  the income excluded from the tax base pursuant to an agreement for the avoidance of 
double taxation is relevant in assessing the tax of the participants,  or  
2.  withheld taxes and corporation tax are to be credited against the assessed tax.  
Secti on 181  
Procedural rules for separate determination, determination period, obligation to file returns  
(1) The provisions on executing the taxation procedure shall apply mutatis mutandis  to separate 
determination. A return for the separate determination of tax bases shall be a tax return as described in 
section 170(2), first sentence, number 1. If a return for separate determination under section 180(2) is 
filed with out a corresponding request by the revenue authority to do so, section 170(3) shall apply 
mutatis mutandis . 
(2) Those persons to whom the object of the determination is wholly or partially attributable shall file a 
return for separate determination. The fo llowing persons in particular shall be required to file a return:  
1.  in cases referred to in section 180(1), first sentence, number 2a, every participant in the 
determination who has earned a share of the income subject to income tax or corporation tax,  
2.  in the cases referred to in section 180(1), first sentence, number 2b, the trader,  
3.  in the cases referred to in section 180(1), first sentence, number 3, every participant in the 
determination to whom a share of the assets, debts or other deductions is attributable,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 88 of 141 4.  in the cases referred to in section 180(1), first sentence, numbers 2a and 3, the persons 
specified in section 34.  
If a person who is required to file a return for separate determination has already done so, other 
participants shall be  exempt from the requirement to file a return.  
(2a) The return for separate determination under section 180(1), first sentence, number 2 shall be 
transmitted using an officially prescribed data set via remote data transmission. To avoid undue 
hardship, the  revenue authority may waive electronic transmission upon request; in such cases, the 
return for separate determination shall be filed using an officially prescribed form and personally signed 
by the person required to file a declaration.  
(3) The period wi thin which the separate determination of assessed values is to be undertaken 
(determination period) shall begin upon expiration of the calendar year at whose beginning the main 
determination, the updating, the subsequent determination or the cancellation o f an assessed value is to 
be carried out. Where a return for the separate determination of the assessed value is to be filed, the 
determination period shall begin upon expiration of the calendar year in which the return is filed, but no 
later than upon exp iration of the third calendar year following the calendar year at the beginning of which 
the determination of the assessed value is to be carried out or cancelled. Where the beginning of the 
determination period pursuant to the second sentence above is pos tponed, the beginning of the 
determination period shall be postponed by the same amount of time for the other determination dates of 
the main determination period.  
(4) In the cases mentioned in subsection (3) above, the determination period shall not begi n before 
expiration of the calendar year at the beginning of which the assessed value applies for tax purposes for 
the first time.  
(5) Separate determination may also be undertaken following the expiration of the determination period 
to which it applies in  as much as the separate determination is of relevance for a tax assessment for 
which the period of assessment has not yet expired at the time the separate determination is made; 
section 171(10) shall not be taken into account. Reference shall be made to s uch in the notice of 
determination. Section 169(1), third sentence, shall apply mutatis mutandis . 
Section 182  
Effects of separate determination  
(1) Notices of determination, even when they are not yet incontestable, shall be binding for other notices 
of de termination, for base tax amount notices, for tax assessment notices and for self -assessed tax 
returns (follow -up notices) to the extent that the determinations made in the notices of determination are 
relevant for these follow -up notices. In the case of d eterminations pursuant to section 180(5) number 2, 
this shall apply accordingly to administrative acts affecting the realisation of claims from the tax debtor -
creditor relationship. If a notice of determination pursuant to section 180(5) number 2 is issued , 
cancelled or amended, any administrative act for which such notice of determination has a binding effect 
shall be corrected, applying section 175(1), first sentence, number 1 accordingly.  
(2) A notice of determination for an assessed value pursuant to se ction 180(1), first sentence, number 1 
shall also have effect for legal successors to whom, after the determination has been carried out, the 
object of the determination is transferred with corresponding tax implications. However, if legal 
succession takes  place before the notice of determination has been issued, the notice shall have effect 
for the legal successor only if it is disclosed to him. The first and second sentences above shall apply 
accordingly to (a) separate and (b) separate and joint tax base  determinations that do not have effect 
until a later point in time, in accordance with the “Ordinance on the separate determination of tax bases” 
adopted in accordance with section 180(2).  
(3) If a separate determination is carried out jointly for multipl e participants in accordance with the 
second sentence of section 179(2), and if the notice of determination incorrectly identifies a participant 
because a legal successor has taken that participant’s place, this may be rectified by issuing a special 
notice  to the legal successor.  
Section 183  
Authorised recipients in the case of joint determination  
(1) Where a notice of determination is directed against several persons who are involved in the object of 
the determination as partners or co -owners (participant in the determination), these should appoint a 
common recipient authorised to take receipt of all administrative acts and notifications connected with 
the determination procedure and any subsequent objection proceedings. In the absence of a common 
authorise d recipient, a person entitled to represent the partnership or participants in the determination or 
to manage the object of the determination shall be the authorised recipient. Where this is not the case, 
the revenue authority may demand that participants appoint an authorised recipient within a certain 
reasonable period. To this end, a participant shall be proposed and reference shall be made to the fact 
that he will be notified of the administrative acts and notifications named in the first sentence above  with 
effect for and against all participants, to the extent that no other authorised recipient is appointed. In Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 89 of 141 notifying the authorised recipient, reference shall be made to the fact that notification is done with effect 
for and against all participants in the determination.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall not apply where the revenue authority is aware that the partnership or 
association no longer exists, that a participant is no longer part of the partnership or association, or that 
serious differences of  opinion exist between the participants. Where pursuant to the first sentence above 
individual notification is necessary, the participant shall be informed of the object of the determination, 
the tax bases concerning all participants, his share, the number  of participants and the tax bases 
concerning him personally. Where he has a legitimate interest, the participant shall be informed of the 
entire contents of the notice of determination.  
(3) Where an authorised recipient pursuant to subsection (1), first s entence, above exists, notices of 
determination may be made known to him even with effect for a participant named in subsection (2), first 
sentence, above to the extent that and provided that this participant or the authorised recipient has not 
objected. A ny revocation of the authorisation shall take effect in relation to the revenue authority only 
once the revenue authority has received it.  
(4) Where an economic entity is attributed to  
1. spouses or civil partners or  
2. spouses and their children, civil pa rtners and their children, or single parents and their 
children,  
and where the participants have not appointed a common authorised recipient, the provisions of section 
122(7) on consolidated notices shall apply accordingly with regard to the disclosure of notices of 
determination on the assessed value.  
II. Assessment of base amounts of non -personal taxes  
Section 184  
Assessment of base amounts of non -personal taxes  
(1) Base amounts of non -personal taxes which are to be calculated pursuant to the tax laws sha ll be 
assessed by way of base tax amount notice. The assessment of base amounts of non -personal taxes 
shall also constitute a decision on the personal and material tax liability. The provisions on executing the 
taxation procedure shall apply mutatis mutand is. In addition, section 182(1) and, for notices assessing 
the base amount of real property tax, section 182(2) and section 183 shall apply mutatis mutandis . 
(2) The power to assess base amounts of non -personal taxes shall also include the power to take 
measures pursuant to section 163(1), first sentence, insofar as guidelines for such measures have been 
set out in a general administrative provision adopted by the Federal Government, the highest federal 
revenue authority or the highest revenue authority of a Land . To the extent that a measure taken 
pursuant to the second sentence of section 163(1) influences commercial revenue as a basis for 
assessing income tax, such measure shall also have effect for trade income as a basis for assessing the 
base amount of  trade tax.  
(3) The revenue authorities shall report the content of the base tax amount notice and the measures 
taken pursuant to subsection (2) above to the municipalities charged with assessing the tax (issuing the 
base tax amount notice).  
3rd Subchapter  
Apportionment and allocation  
Section 185  
Validity of the general provisions  
The provisions which apply to the base amounts of non -personal taxes shall apply accordingly to the 
apportionment of such base amounts as provided for in the tax laws unless other wise stipulated in the 
following.  
Section 186  
Participants  
The following shall participate in the apportionment procedure:  
1. the taxpayer,  
2. the taxing entities to which a share of a base amount of non -personal tax has been 
allocated or which claim a sha re. Where the taxing entity is not obliged to assess the tax, the 
authority responsible for assessing the tax shall take its place.  
Section 187  
Inspection of files  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 90 of 141 The participating taxing entities may demand from the competent revenue authority informatio n 
regarding the basis of apportionment and may have its public officials inspect the records relating to the 
apportionment.  
Section 188  
Notice of apportionment  
(1) A notice on the apportionment (apportionment notice) shall be issued in writing and made kno wn to 
the participants where it affects them.  
(2) The apportionment notice shall specify the volume of the base amount of non -personal tax to be 
apportioned and shall determine the shares to be allocated to the participating taxing entities. 
Furthermore, i t shall provide details of the basis of apportionment.  
Section 189  
Amendment to the apportionment  
Where a taxing entity’s claim to a share of a base amount of non -personal tax has not been taken into 
account and has not been rejected, the apportionment sha ll be amended or subsequently undertaken ex 
officio  or upon application. Where the existing apportionment notice relating to taxing entities that have 
already participated in the apportionment procedure has become incontestable, only those amendments 
which  result from the subsequent inclusion of the taxing entities that have hitherto been overlooked may 
be undertaken when amending the apportionment. The apportionment shall not be amended or 
subsequently undertaken where one year has passed since the base ta x amount notice became 
incontestable unless the taxing entity overlooked had applied before the year has expired for the 
amendment to be subsequently undertaken or amended.  
Section 190  
Allocation procedure  
Where the full volume of a base amount of non -personal tax is to be allocated to one taxing entity but 
there is disagreement as to which taxing entity is entitled to such base amount, the revenue authority 
shall reach a decision by way of allocation notice upon application by a participant. The provisions  which 
apply to the apportionment procedure shall apply accordingly.  
4th Subchapter  
Liability  
Section 191  
Notices of liability, notices of compulsory tolerance  
(1) A claim may be made by way of notice of liability against anyone who is legally liable for a  tax (liable 
person) or by way of notice of compulsory tolerance against anyone who is legally obliged to tolerate 
enforcement. Contestations relating to claims from the tax debtor -creditor relationship which are not part 
of insolvency proceedings shall be  made by way of notice of compulsory tolerance provided that they are 
not to be made by way of plea as provided for in section 9 of the Act on Contesting Transactions of a 
Debtor Not Included in Insolvency Proceedings; in calculating deadlines pursuant to sections 3 and 4 of 
said Act, the issue of a notice of compulsory tolerance shall be deemed equal to a judicial act allowing 
contestability pursuant to section 7(1) of the Act. The notices shall be issued in writing.  
(2) Before a notice of liability is iss ued against a lawyer, a patent agent, a notary, a tax consultant, a tax 
representative, an auditor or a certified accountant on account of an action within the meaning of section 
69 carried out in the exercise of his profession, the revenue authority shall  allow the responsible 
professional organisation the opportunity to present aspects which from its perspective are of relevance 
to the decision.  
(3) The provisions on the period for assessment shall apply accordingly to the issue of notices of liability. 
The period for assessment shall be four years in the cases referred to in section 70, ten years in the 
case of tax evasion, five years in the case of reckless tax understatement, and ten years in the cases 
referred to in section 71. The period for assessmen t shall begin upon expiration of the calendar year in 
which the matter to which the law attaches the consequence of liability arose. Where the tax for which 
liability is borne has not yet been assessed, the period for assessment for the notice of liability  shall not 
end before expiration of the period for assessment which applies to the assessment of taxes; where this 
is not the case, section 171(10) shall apply mutatis mutandis . In the cases referred to in sections 73 and 
74, the period for assessment shal l not end before the period of limitations for tax assessed against the 
tax debtor has become time -barred (section 228).  
(4) Where the tax laws do not provide for the liability, a notice of liability may be issued as long as the 
liability claims are not ye t time -barred pursuant to the laws relevant to them.  
(5) A notice of liability may no longer be issued  
1. insofar as the tax has not been assessed against the tax debtor and, because the period for 
assessment has expired, can no longer be assessed,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 91 of 141 2. insofar as the tax assessed against the tax debtor is time -barred or the tax debt has been 
remitted.  
This shall not apply where the liability is based on the fact that the person owing the liability has 
committed tax evasion or has received, held or sold prope rty obtained by tax evasion.  
Section 192  
Contractual liability  
Whoever promises on the basis of a contract to assume responsibility for the tax of another may be 
required to do so only in accordance with the provisions of civil law.  
Fourth Chapter  
Externa l audit  
1st Subchapter  
General provisions  
Section 193  
Permissibility of an external audit  
(1) It shall be permissible to conduct audits of taxpayers who operate a business or agricultural and 
forestry undertaking or who are self -employed, and of taxpayers within the meaning of section 147a.  
(2) With respect to taxpayers other than those described in subsection (1) above, an external audit shall 
be permissible  
1. to the extent that it concerns the obligation of these taxpayers on behalf of another to pay 
taxes or to withhold or remit to revenue authorities taxes which are due,  
2. where there is a need to clarify the circumstances relevant for taxation and, due to the 
nature and scope of the circumstances to be examined, it is impractical to conduct an examina tion at 
the offices of the competent authority, or  
3. where a taxpayer fails to comply with his obligation to cooperate under section 90(2), third 
sentence.  
Section 194  
Scope of an external audit  
(1) The external audit shall serve to identify the taxpayer’ s circumstances for tax purposes. It may cover 
one or more types of tax, one or more tax periods or be limited to certain aspects. The external audit of a 
partnership  shall cover the partners’ circumstances for tax purposes to the extent that these are of 
importance with respect to the joint determinations to be examined. The tax circumstances of other 
persons may also be audited to the extent that the taxpayer was or is obliged on behalf of these persons 
to pay taxes or withhold and remit to revenue author ities taxes which are due; this shall also apply where 
any tax deficiencies are to be enforced against the other persons.  
(2) The tax circumstances of partners and members as well as of members of supervisory bodies may, 
in addition to the cases governed b y subsection (1) above, be included in the external audit to be 
conducted at a partnership where this serves the purpose of the audit in individual cases.  
(3) Where due to an external audit circumstances of persons other than those named in subsection (1) 
above are determined, the evaluation of these findings shall be permissible to the extent that knowledge 
of such is of relevance for the taxation of these other persons or the findings concern an impermissible 
provisio n of assistance in tax matters.   
Secti on 195  
Jurisdiction  
External audits shall be conducted by the revenue authorities responsible for the taxation. These may 
charge other revenue authorities with the external audit. The appointed revenue authority may undertake 
the tax assessment and issue b inding commitments (sections 204 to 207) in the name of the competent 
revenue authority.  
Section 196  
Audit order  
Revenue authorities shall specify the scope of an external audit in an audit order that is issued in written 
or electronic form and that contai ns instructions on applicable legal remedies in accordance with section 
356. 
Section 197  
Disclosure of the audit order  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 92 of 141 (1) The audit order as well as the likely starting date of the audit and the names of the auditors shall be 
disclosed to the taxpayer in relation to whom the external audit is to be conducted a reasonable amount 
of time before the audit begins where this does not endanger the purpose of the audit. The taxpayer may 
elect not to have the deadline enforced. Where pursuant to section 194(2) the  audit is to cover the tax 
circumstances of partners and members as well as members of supervisory bodies, the audit order shall 
also be disclosed to these persons.  
(2) Upon application by the taxpayer, the starting date of the external audit shall be post poned to another 
date where important reasons for th is can be established credibly.  
Section 198  
Identification duty, start of external audit  
The auditors shall identify themselves without undue delay upon arrival at the premises. The date and 
time of the c ommencement of the external audit shall be recorded.  
Section 199  
Audit principles  
(1) The external auditor shall examine the actual and legal circumstances which are decisive for the tax 
obligation and for measuring the tax (tax bases), regardless of wheth er these are to the taxpayer’s 
advantage or disadvantage.  
(2) The taxpayer shall be informed during the external audit of the facts determined and the possible tax 
implications where this does not impede the purpose and course of the audit.  
Section 200  
Obligations of the taxpayer to cooperate  
(1) The taxpayer shall be obliged to cooperate in determining the facts that may be relevant for taxation. 
In particular, he shall furnish information; submit records, accounts, business papers and other 
documents for inspection and audit; provide the explanations necessary to understand the records; and 
assist the revenue authority in executing its powers pursuant to section 147(6). Where the taxpayer or 
persons appointed by him are not able to furnish information, whe re the information is not sufficient to 
clarify the facts or where information furnished by the taxpayer is not likely to lead to results, the external 
auditor may request information from other persons belonging to the business. Section 93(2), second 
sentence, shall not apply.  
(2) The taxpayer shall submit the documents named in subsection (1) above on his business premises 
or, where there is no office suitable for conducting the external audit available, on his living premises or 
at the offices of the com petent authority. A room or workstation suitable for conducting the audit as well 
as the necessary aids shall be provided free of charge.  
(3) The external audit shall be conducted during normal business or working hours. The auditors shall be 
entitled to e nter and inspect sites and business premises. The owner of the business or his 
representative should be enlisted in the inspection of the premises.  
Section 201  
Final meeting  
(1) A meeting shall be held on the results of the external audit (final meeting) u nless the external audit 
leads to no changes to the tax bases or the taxpayer elects to forgo such a meeting. During the final 
meeting, disputed issues in particular as well as a legal assessment of the audit findings and their tax 
implications shall be di scussed.  
(2) Where the possibility exists that, on the basis of the audit findings, criminal or administrative fine 
proceedings are to be conducted, the taxpayer should be advised that a separate procedure will be 
conducted to assess the possibility of cri minal or administrative fine proceedings.  
Section 202  
Content and disclosure of audit report  
(1) A written report (audit report) shall be drawn up showing the result of the external audit. The audit 
report shall present in actual and legal terms the audit findings which are significant for taxation as well 
as the changes to the bases for taxation. Where the external audit does not lead to any changes to the 
bases for taxation, it shall be sufficient to disclose this to the taxpayer in writing.  
(2) The reven ue authority shall, upon application, supply the taxpayer with a copy of the audit report 
before it is evaluated and allow him opportunity to comment on it within a reasonable period of time.  
Section 203  
Shortened external audit  
(1) The revenue authority m ay conduct a shortened external audit of taxpayers in respect of whom it 
regards an external audit in frequent intervals unnecessary in the particular circumstances. The audit 
shall be restricted to the essential tax bases.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 93 of 141 (2) The taxpayer shall be inform ed before the audit is concluded of the extent of any likely deviations 
from the tax returns or tax assessments. The main audit findings of relevance for tax purposes shall be 
presented in writing to the taxpayer at the latest with the tax assessment notic es. Sections 201(1) and 
202(2) shall not apply.  
Section 203a  
External audits in cases where data is transmitted by third parties  
(1) External audits of notifying entities as defined in section 93c(1) shall be permissible for the purpose of 
determining whet her a notifying entity has  
1.  satisfied its obligations under section 93c(1) numbers 1, 2 and 4, section 93c(2) and section 
93c(3) and  
2.  determined the content of the data set in accordance with the provisions of the relevant tax 
legislation.  
(2) Such e xternal audits shall be conducted by the revenue authority responsible for investigations under 
the first sentence of section 93c(4).  
(3) Section 195, second sentence, and sections 196 to 203 shall apply accordingly.  
2nd Subchapter  
Binding commitments on t he basis of an external audit  
Section 204  
Preconditions for a binding commitment   
Once an external audit has been concluded, the revenue authority should, upon application, make a 
binding commitment to the taxpayer as to how circumstances which were audite d for the past and which 
are contained in the audit report shall be treated for tax purposes in future where knowledge of such 
future tax treatment is important for the business activity of the taxpayer.  
Section 205  
Format of a binding commitment  
(1) The b inding commitment shall be issued in writing and shall be indicated as binding.  
(2) The binding commitment shall contain:  
1. the underlying circumstances for the binding commitment; in this regard, reference may be 
made to the circumstances described in th e audit report,  
2. the decision on the application and the main reasons for this,  
3. information stating the taxes and period to which the binding commitment applies.  
Section 206  
Binding effect  
(1) The binding commitment shall be binding in terms of taxati on where circumstances which match 
those underlying the binding commitment arise at a later date.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall not apply where, to the applicant’s disadvantage, the binding commitment 
contravenes existing law.  
Section 207  
Expiry, cancella tion and amendment of the binding commitment  
(1) The binding commitment shall expire when the legal provisions on which the decision is based are 
changed.  
(2) The revenue authority may cancel or amend the binding commitment with ex nunc  effect.  
(3) The ret roactive cancellation or amendment of a binding commitment shall only be permissible where 
the taxpayer agrees or where the conditions set out in section 130(2) numbers 1 or 2 are met.  
Fifth Chapter  
Tax investigation (customs investigation)  
Section 208  
Tax investigation (customs investigation)  
(1) Tax investigation (customs investigation) authorities shall be charged with  
1. investigating tax crimes and tax -related administrative offences,  
2. determining the tax bases in the cases named in number 1 above,  
3. detecting and investigating unknown tax cases.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 94 of 141 The offices of Land  revenue authorities charged with tax investigations and the customs investigation 
offices shall have, in addition to the powers granted under section 404, second sentence, first half -
sentence, the powers of investigation at the disposal of the tax offices (main customs offices). In the 
cases of numbers 2 and 3 above, the restrictions set out in section 93(1), third sentence, section 93(2), 
second sentence, and section 97(2) shall not appl y; section 200(1), first and second sentences, section 
200(2) and section 200(3), first and second sentences, shall apply mutatis mutandis , section 393(1) shall 
remain unaffected.  
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) above, the offices of the revenue authori ties of a Land  charged with 
tax investigations and the customs investigations offices shall be responsible for  
1. tax investigations, including external audits upon request by the competent revenue 
authority,  
2. the other tasks entrusted to them within the  scope of the jurisdiction of the revenue 
authorities.  
(3) The tasks and powers of the tax offices (main customs offices) shall remain unaffected.  
Sixth Chapter  
Fiscal supervision in special cases  
Section 209  
Object of fiscal supervision  
(1) The movement o f goods over the border and in the free zones and free warehouses as well as the 
production and manufacture, storage, transport and commercial use of goods subject to excise duty and 
the trade of goods subject to excise duty shall be subject to customs sup ervision (fiscal supervision).  
(2) Also subject to fiscal supervision shall be:  
1. the shipping, export, storage, use, destruction, refinement, conversion and other processing 
or treatment of goods in an excise duty procedure,  
2. the manufacture and export  of goods, for which a remission, refund or rebate of excise duty 
is claimed.  
(3) Other activities shall be subject to fiscal supervision where this is required by law.  
Section 210  
Powers of the revenue authorities  
(1) The public officials charged by the r evenue authority with fiscal supervision shall be entitled to enter 
during office and working hours property and premises of persons who exercise an independent 
commercial or professional activity, and to whom a matter subject to fiscal supervision is attr ibutable, for 
the purpose of carrying out inspections or of reaching findings which could have a significant bearing on 
taxation (search).  
(2) Furthermore, property and premises of persons to whom a matter subject to fiscal supervision is 
attributable shal l be subject to search, without restriction as to time, where there is good reason based 
on facts to assume that smuggled goods or goods subject to excise duties but not properly taxed are 
located there or that provisions and orders, the observance of whic h is to be ensured by fiscal 
supervision, are being breached there. In cases of imminent danger the searching of living and business 
premises shall be permissible even without a court order.  
(3) The public officials charged by the revenue authority with fi scal supervision shall be further entitled 
within the context of controls restricted by time and place to stop ships and other vehicles which seem to 
serve commercial purposes based on their outward appearance. The persons affected shall be obliged 
to prov ide proof of their identity and details of the goods being carried; they shall be obliged in particular 
to show consignment notes and other transport documents, including those of a non -tax nature. Where 
this or other facts give rise to the belief that goo ds subject to excise duties are being carried, the public 
officials may examine these goods and reach findings which may have a bearing on the taxation of these 
goods. The persons affected shall be obliged to provide details of the origin of the goods subj ect to 
excise duty, to tolerate the fact that samples may be taken without compensation and to provide the 
necessary assistance.  
(4) An external audit pursuant to section 193 may be initiated without the need for a prior order (section 
196) where reason to  do so arises as a result of findings made when exercising fiscal supervision. The 
transition to an external audit shall be indicated in writing.  
(5) Where it becomes necessary to carry out a search on the premises of the Federal Armed Forces or 
an institu tion or facility of the Federal Armed Forces not open to the public, a request shall be submitted 
to the commanding office of the Federal Armed Forces to carry it out. The revenue authority shall be 
entitled to participate. A request shall not be necessary  where the search is to be carried out in quarters 
exclusively inhabited by persons other than soldiers.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 95 of 141 Section 211  
Obligations of the persons affected  
(1) Whoever is affected by fiscal supervision measures shall be obliged to provide the public officials  on 
demand with records, accounts, business papers and other documents relating to the matter subject to 
fiscal supervision and to the procurement and sale of goods subject to excise duty, with information and 
with the assistance otherwise needed to exerci se fiscal supervision. Section 200(2), second sentence, 
shall apply mutatis mutandis . 
(2) The obligations pursuant to subsection (1) above shall also apply where, within the context of a 
legally prescribed ex post  taxation of goods subject to excise duty, the persons to whom and the extent 
to which goods subject to ex post  taxation were delivered is to be determined in a business or enterprise 
subject to the fiscal supervision.  
(3) Measures which serve to prevent or hamper the exercise of fiscal supervision  shall be impermissible.  
Section 212  
Implementation provisions  
(1) The Federal Ministry of Finance may, by way of ordinances specifying the duties to be fulfilled within 
the context of fiscal supervision, order that  
1. certain actions may only be carried o ut on premises registered with the revenue authority or 
whose use for such purpose has been specially approved by the revenue authority,  
2. premises, vehicles, equipment, vessels and conduits, which serve or may serve the 
manufacture, processing, refinemen t, storage, transport or measurement of taxable goods are to be 
set up, arranged, labelled or officially sealed in a particular manner at the cost of the owner of the 
business,  
3. goods subject to monitoring are treated, labelled, stored, packaged, dispatc hed or used in a 
particular manner,  
4. the trade of taxable goods is specially monitored where the trader is also the manufacturer 
of the goods,  
5. records are to be kept in a particular manner and the inventory is to be determined for 
business processes a nd for taxable goods and for the input materials, production materials, auxiliary 
materials and intermediary products used to manufacture them,  
6. accounts, records and other documents are to be stored in a particular manner,  
7. processes and measures in b usinesses and enterprises which are of relevance for taxation 
are to be reported to the revenue authority,  
8. gratuitous samples may be taken or gratuitous examples submitted of taxable goods, of 
goods in relation to which the remission, refund or rebate o f excise duties is claimed, of material used 
in the manufacture these goods, and of their packaging.  
(2) Such ordinances shall not require the consent of the Bundesrat, except where they concern beer 
duty.  
Section 213  
Special supervisory measures  
Business es or enterprises whose owners or executives have been finally and incontestably convicted of 
tax evasion, attempted tax evasion or participation in such an act may be subjected at their own costs to 
special supervisory measure where this is needed to ensu re effective fiscal supervision. In particular, 
additional records and disclosure obligations, measures to ensure that premises, containers and 
equipment are safely sealed and other similar measures may be prescribed.  
Section 214  
Representatives  
Any person  who authorises a member of his business or undertaking to represent him for the purpose of 
fulfilling tax obligations arising from matters subject to fiscal supervision shall require the consent of the 
revenue authority.  
Section 215  
Seizure during supervi sion 
(1) The revenue authority may secure by way of removal, placement under seal or prohibition on 
disposal  
1. goods subject to excise duty which a public official finds  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 96 of 141 a) in manufacturing businesses or on other premises which should have been registered  
with the revenue authority but were not,  
b) in trade without the goods being packaged, denoted or labelled in accordance with the 
tax laws or without the prescribed tax marks,  
2. goods which are found in proximity to the border or in regions subject to bo rder surveillance, 
where these are neither obviously Community goods nor appear to have been released for free 
circulation,  
3. the items and material used to enclose the goods named in numbers 1 and 2 above,  
4. equipment which is designed to manufacture go ods subject to excise duty and which is 
located in a manufacturing business not registered with the revenue authority.  
It shall also be permissible to secure the items where they were initially confiscated in the course of 
criminal proceedings and then ma de available to the revenue authority.  
(2) The act of securing the items shall be recorded in writing. The act of securing the items shall be 
disclosed to the persons affected (owners, possessors) to the extent that these are known.  
Section 216  
Transfer t o federal ownership  
(1) Items secured pursuant to section 215 shall be transferred to federal ownership provided that they 
are not confiscated pursuant to section 375(2). This shall apply to found items only to the extent that no 
ownership claims are enfor ced. 
(2) The persons affected shall be informed of the transfer of secured items to federal ownership. Where 
it is not known who the affected person is, section 10(2) of the Administrative Service of Documents Act 
shall apply mutatis mutandis . 
(3) The tran sfer of ownership shall take effect as soon as the administrative act issued by the revenue 
authority has become incontestable. Subject to the first sentence above, ownership of items connected 
to the Land  shall be deemed transferred once they have been de tached. Third -party rights relating to a 
secured item shall remain. However, the termination of these rights may be ordered where the third party 
has contributed recklessly to circumstances that led to the securing of the item transferred to federal 
owners hip or where he has acquired his rights to the item while aware of the circumstances that led to 
the securing of the item.  
(4) Secured items may be sold before they have been transferred to federal ownership where there is a 
danger of decay or considerable  loss in value or where theirretention, maintenance or preservation is 
accompanied by disproportionately high costs or difficulties; to this end, items which are attached to the 
ground or Land  may be detached from these. The proceeds of sale shall take the  place of the item. The 
emergency sale of these items shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Code on the 
realisation of attached items. The persons concerned are to be consulted before the sale is ordered. 
They shall be informed of th e order and the time and place of the sale where possible.  
(5) Secured items or items already transferred to federal ownership shall be returned where the 
circumstances which led to their securing are not attributable to the owner or where transfer to fede ral 
ownership would seem to result in undue hardship for the persons affected. Third parties acting in good 
faith whose rights have been cancelled or impeded by the transfer to federal ownership shall be 
adequately compensated for such from the proceeds of  the realisation of the item. In other respects, 
compensation may be granted where the refusal of such would mean undue hardship.  
Section 217  
Tax aides  
In order to determine facts which have a bearing on customs or excise duties, the revenue authority may 
appoint as tax aides persons who themselves are not affected by the outcome of such findings.  
Fifth Part  
Levy procedure  
First Chapter  
Realisation, maturity and expiration of claims arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship  
1st Subc hapter  
Realisatio n and maturity of claims arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship  
Section 218  
Realisation of claims from the tax debtor -creditor relationship  
(1) Tax assessment notices, tax rebate notices, notices of liability and administrative acts through whi ch 
ancillary tax payments are assessed shall form the basis for realising claims arising from the tax debtor -Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 97 of 141 creditor relationship (section 37); where late -payment penalties are concerned, mere fulfilment of the 
legal stipulations shall be enough (section 240). Self -assessed tax returns (section 168) shall be deemed 
equivalent to tax assessment notices.  
(2) Decisions by the revenue authorities regarding disputes over the realisation of claims within the 
meaning of subsection (1) above shall be rendered by w ay of settlement notice. This shall also apply 
where the dispute concerns a refund claim (section 37(2)).  
(3) If a tax summary or settlement notice is rescinded on the basis of an appeal or upon application by 
the taxpayer or a third party and an administr ative act is subsequently issued that is more beneficial for 
the taxpayer, any resulting tax consequences for the taxpayer or a third party may be effected 
retroactively. Section 174(4) and (5) shall apply accordingly.  
Section 219  
Requirement to pay in the  case of notices of liability  
Unless otherwise stipulated, a person owing a liability may be required to pay only if enforcement against 
the tax debtor’s movable property was not successful or it can be assumed that enforcement would not 
lead to the desire d result. This restriction shall not apply if the liability is due to the fact that the person 
owing the liability has committed tax evasion or has received, held or sold goods obtained by tax evasion 
or is legally obliged to withhold and remit to revenue authorities taxes which are due or to pay them at 
the expense of another.  
Section 220  
Maturity  
(1) The due date for payment of claims arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship shall be based on 
the provisions of the tax laws.  
(2) Where the due date  is not governed by a particular legal provision, the claim shall be due on the date 
on which it arises unless a deadline for payment has been granted in the case of a demand for payment 
required pursuant to section 254. Where in the cases described in the  first sentence above the claim 
results from the assessment of claims arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship, the amount shall 
not fall due before the assessment has been disclosed.  
Section 221  
Other maturity  
Where a taxpayer has failed several times to pay an excise duty or VAT on time, the revenue authority 
may demand payment of the tax by a date before the legal due date but after the tax has arisen, to be 
determined by the revenue authority. The same shall apply where there is good reason to assume that 
the receipt of an excise duty or the VAT is at risk; collateral may also be demanded in lieu of bringing the 
due date forward. It shall be permissible to bring the due date forward in the cases described in the first 
sentence above only where t he taxpayer has been informed of such in the event of his renewed failure to 
pay the tax on time.  
Section 222  
Deferment  
The revenue authorities may defer in full or in part claims from the tax debtor -creditor relationship where 
their collection at due date  would result in considerable hardship for the debtor and the claim would not 
appear to be endangered by the deferment. As a rule, deferments may be granted only upon application 
and the provision of collateral. Tax claims against the tax debtor may not be  deferred where a third party 
(party obliged to pay the tax) must pay the tax on behalf of the tax debtor, in particular by withholding 
and remitting the tax due to the revenue authorities. Deferments of liability claims against such third 
parties obliged to pay taxes shall be ruled out where such parties have withheld tax amounts or taken 
receipt of amounts which contain a tax.  
Section 223  
(rescinded)  
2nd Subchapter  
Payment, set -off and remission  
Section 224  
Place of payment, date of payment  
(1) Payments t o the revenue authorities shall be made to the cash office responsible. Payments beyond 
the premises of the cash office may be surrendered only to a public official who is specially authorised to 
accept such payment and who can provide identification to ve rify such.  
(2) Payment shall be deemed as having been effected:  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 98 of 141 1. on the date it is received, where a means of payment is delivered or sent, or three days 
after the date it is received where a cheque is delivered or sent,  
2. on the date the amount is cred ited to the revenue authority, where money is transferred or 
paid to an account of the revenue authority, and where payment is made via payment slip,  
3. on the due date of payment, where direct debit is authorised.  
(3) Revenue authority payments shall be m ade via non -cash instruments. The Federal Ministry of 
Finance and the highest authorities of the Länder  responsible for the revenue administration may allow 
exceptions for their subordinate bodies. The date of payment shall be, in the case of bank transfer  or 
payment order, the third day after the order is handed in or sent to the credit institution or, where the 
amount is not to be debited immediately, the third day after it is debited.  
(4) The responsible cash office may be closed for the delivery of paym ent against receipt. Subsection (2) 
number 1 above shall apply accordingly where, in the event of closed premises pursuant to the first 
sentence above, one or more branch offices of the Bundesbank, or, where these do not exist where the 
cash office is loca ted, one or more credit institutions, are authorised to accept payment again st receipt 
for the cash office.  
Section 224a  
Objects of art in lieu of payment  
(1) Where a taxpayer owes inheritance tax or capital tax, it shall be possible to transfer ownership of 
objects of art, art collections, scientific collections, libraries, manuscripts and archives in lieu of payment 
and by way of contract under public law to the Land  which is entitled to the tax revenue, provided that it 
is in the public interest to acqui re such items due to their artistic, historical or academic importance. The 
transfer of ownership pursuant to the first sentence above shall not count as alienation within the 
meaning of section 13(1) number 2, second sentence, of the Inheritance Tax Act.  
(2) Contracts pursuant to subsection (1) above shall be in written form; contracts in electronic form shall 
not be permitted. The taxpayer shall address the contractual offer to the revenue authority with local 
jurisdiction. Responsibility for concluding t he contract shall rest with the highest revenue authority of the 
Land  which is entitled to the tax revenue. The contract shall enter into force only after the highest 
authority of a Land  responsible for cultural affairs has given its consent; this consent shall be secured by 
the highest revenue authority.  
(3) Where a contract comes into effect, the tax debt shall be cancelled to the amount of the sum agreed 
in the contract on the date ownership is transferred to the Land  which is entitled to the tax revenue . 
(4) The tax claim may be deferred pursuant to section 222 for as long as it is uncertain whether a 
contract will come into force. Where a contract comes into force, there shall be no deferment interest 
rates levied for the period in which the claim was d eferred.  
Section 225  
Order of amortisation  
(1) Where a taxpayer owes several amounts and, in the case of voluntary payment, the amount paid is 
not sufficient to amortise all debts, the debt which the taxpayer designates when making the payment 
shall be amo rtised.  
(2) Where the taxpayer does not designate a debt, but makes voluntary payment which does not cover 
all debts, administrative penalties shall be paid first, followed, in this order, by coercive fines, withholding 
taxes, other taxes, costs, late -filing penalties, interest and late -payment penalties. Within this order, the 
individual debts shall be arranged according to their maturities; the revenue authority shall determine the 
order of amortisation for amounts falling due simultaneously and with rega rd to late -payment penalties.  
(3) Where payment is forced by administrative decision (section 249) and the amount available is 
insufficient to amortise all debts for which enforcement was imposed or the collateral realised, the 
revenue authority shall dete rmine the order of amortisation.  
Section 226  
Set-off 
(1) Unless otherwise stipulated, the provisions of civil law shall apply mutatis mutandis  with regard to 
using both claims from the tax debtor -creditor relationship and counterclaims to set off claims.  
(2) Claims arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship may not be used as set -off where they have 
lapsed through limitation or the expiry of a period of exclusion.  
(3) Taxpayers may set off claims arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship only  with counterclaims 
which are uncontested and have been established as final andbinding.  
(4) The political subdivision that administers the tax shall also be deemed to be creditor or debtor of a 
claim from the tax debtor -creditor relationship with respect to any set -off. Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 99 of 141 Section 227  
Remission  
The revenue authorities may remit in full or in part claims arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship 
where their collection would be unreasonable given the circumstances; under the same conditions, 
amounts alr eady paid may be refunded or credited.  
3rd Subchapter  
Lapse of right to enforce payment of overdue tax  
Section 228  
Object of the limitation, limitation period  
Claims arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship shall be subject to a special limitation  period on 
the payment of overdue tax. The limitation period shall be five years, or ten years in cases where section 
370, 373 or 374 applies.  
Section 229  
Beginning of limitation period  
(1) The limitation period shall begin upon expiration of the calendar year in which the claim first fell due. 
However, it shall not begin before expiration of the calendar year in which the assessment, from which 
the claim arises, of a claim arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship, or its cancellation, 
amendment or  correction pursuant to section 129 has come into effect; a self -assessed tax return shall 
be deemed equal to a tax assessment.  
(2) Where a notice of liability has been issued without an order to pay, the period of limitation shall begin 
upon expiration of  the calendar year in which the notice of liability has come into effect.  
Section 230  
Suspension of limitation period  
The period of limitation shall be suspended as long as the claim cannot be pursued as a result of force 
majeure  within the final six month s of the period of limitation.  
Section 231  
Interruption of limitation period  
(1) The limitation period shall be interrupted in the event of:  
1.  postponement of payment, deferment, suspension of enforcement, suspension of a 
customs debtor’s obligation to p ay duties, or postponement of enforcement,  
2.  provision of collateral,  
3.  an enforcement measure,  
4.  filing of a claim in insolvency proceedings,  
5.  entry into force of a prohibition on enforcement in accordance with section 294(1) of the 
Insolvency C ode, 
6.  inclusion in an insolvency plan or a judicial debt settlement plan,  
7.  revenue authority investigations to ascertain the taxpayer’s place of residence or abode, or  
8. enforcement of the claim in writing.  
Section 169(1), third sentence, shall appl y mutatis mutandis . 
(2) The interruption of the limitation period shall last,  
1.  in cases where subsection (1), first sentence, number 1 above applies, until the end of the 
respective measure,  
2.  in cases where subsection (1), first sentence, number 2 ab ove applies, until the collateral is 
released,  
3.  in cases where subsection (1), first sentence, number 3 above applies, until the attachment 
lien, judgement lien, or other preferential right expires,  
4.  in cases where subsection (1), first sentence, num ber 4 above applies, until the end of the 
insolvency proceedings,  
5.  in cases where subsection (1), first sentence, number 5 above applies, until the prohibition 
on enforcement ceases to apply,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 100 of 141 6.  in cases where subsection (1), first sentence, number 6 a bove applies, until the insolvency 
plan or judicial debt settlement plan is fulfilled or ceases to apply.  
In cases where a claim is lodged against a revenue authority, the resulting interruption of the limitation 
period shall not end before a final and bin ding decision on the claim has been issued.  
(3) A new limitation period shall begin upon expiration of the calendar year in which the interruption 
ends.  
(4) The limitation period shall be interrupted only for the amount to which the interrupting measure 
pertains.  
Section 232  
Effect of limitation period  
The claim arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship and the dependent interest shall be rescinded 
upon expiration of the limitation period.  
Second Chapter  
Interest accrual, late -payment penalties  
1st Subchapter  
Interest accrual  
Section 233  
General  
Interest shall be charged on claims arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship (section 37) only to 
the extent that this is legally prescribed. Interest shall not be charged on claims to ancillary tax payments 
(section 3(4)) and t he corresponding refund claims.  
Section 233a  
Interest accrual on tax deficiencies and tax refunds  
(1) Where the assessment of income tax, corporation tax, capital tax, VAT or trade tax leads to a 
differential within the meaning  of subsection (3) below, interest shall be charged on this differential. This 
shall not apply to the assessment of prepayments and withheld taxes.  
(2) The period of interest accrual shall begin 15 months after expiration of the calendar year in which the 
tax has arisen. With respect to income tax and corporation tax, it shall begin 23 months after this date 
where the income from agricultural and forestry undertakings is more than other income when the tax is 
first assessed. It shall end on expiration of th e date when the tax assessment comes into effect.  
(2a) Notwithstanding subsection (2), first and second sentences, above, where the tax assessment is 
based on an event with retroactive effect (section 175(1), first sentence, number 2 and section 175(2)) or  
a loss deduction pursuant to section 10d(1) of the Income Tax Act, the period of interest accrual shall 
begin 15 months after expiration of the calendar year in which the event with retroactive effect occurred 
or the loss was incurred.  
(3) The assessed ta x minus the withheld taxes to be credited, the corporation tax to be credited and the 
prepayments assessed up to the beginning of the period of interest accrual (differential) shall form the 
basis for calculating the interest. With respect to capital tax, the assessed tax minus the assessed 
prepayments or the annual tax assessed to date shall form the basis of the differential for calculating the 
interest. Interest shall be charged on a differential in the taxpayer’s favour only up to an amount equal to 
the amount to be refunded; interest shall begin to accrue at the earliest on the date of payment.  
(4) The assessment of interest should be issued in conjunction with the tax assessment.  
(5) Where the tax assessment is cancelled, amended or corrected pursuant  to section 129, any previous 
assessment of interest shall be amended; the same shall apply where the crediting of tax amounts is 
withdrawn, revoked or corrected pursuant to section 129. The differential between the assessed tax and 
the previously assessed  tax, both reduced by the amounts of withheld tax and corporation tax to be 
credited, shall form the basis for calculating interest. The resulting interest amount shall be 
supplemented by the assessable interest up to this point; where the differential is in the taxpayer’s 
favour, assessed interest shall be added to this amount. In other respects, subsection (3), third 
sentence, above shall apply accordingly.  
(6) Subsections (1) to (5) above shall apply accordingly to the annual adjustment of wages tax.  
(7) In applying subsection (2a) above, subsections (3) and (5) above shall apply under the proviso that 
the differential is to be divided into sub -differentials, each sub -differential being comprised of sub -
amounts with the same starting date for the accrual of interest; interest shall be calculated for each sub -
differential separately and in the chronological order of the sub -differentials, beginning with the interest 
on the sub -differential with the earliest commencement date of interest accrual. Where a sub -differential 
in the taxpayer’s favour results, assessed interest shall be charged on this amount at the earliest from 
the beginning of the decisive period of interest accrual for this sub -differential; interest for the period up 
to the beginning of this s ub-differential’s period of interest accrual shall remain permanently. This shall Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 101 of 141 also apply where, previously within the same interest calculation, interest had been calculated on a sub -
differential in the taxpayer’s favour.  
Section 234  
Interest during de ferment  
(1) Interest shall be levied for the period for which a deferment of claims arising from the tax debtor -
creditor relationship is granted. Where upon expiration of the deferment the tax assessment notice is 
cancelled, amended or corrected pursuant t o section 129, the interest accrued up to this time shall 
remain unaffected.  
(2) Interest may be waived in full or in part where its collection would be unreasonable in individual 
cases.  
(3) Interest amounts pursuant to section 233a which have been assesse d for the same period shall be 
credited.  
Section 235  
Interest accrual on evaded taxes  
(1) Interest shall be charged on evaded taxes. The debtor of the interest shall be the person to whose 
advantage the taxes have been evaded. Where tax evasion is committe d by a person other than the tax 
debtor failing to fulfil his obligation to remit withheld taxes to the revenue authority or to pay taxes 
imposed on another, this person shall be the debtor of the interest.  
(2) The period of interest accrual shall begin u pon occurrence of the understating of the taxes or 
attainment of the tax advantage unless the evaded amounts would have fallen due at a later date had 
the taxes not been evaded. In this case, the later point in time shall be decisive.  
(3) The period of acc rual of interest shall end upon payment of the evaded taxes. Interest pursuant to 
this provision shall not be levied in a period to which a late -payment penalty applies or for which the 
payment is deferred or implementation suspended. Where upon conclusion  of the period of interest 
accrual the tax assessment notice is cancelled, amended or corrected pursuant to section 129, the 
interest accrued up to this time shall remain unaffected.  
(4) Interest amounts pursuant to section 233a which have been assessed fo r the same period shall be 
credited.  
Section 236  
Interest on refund amounts during legal proceedings  
(1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (3) below, where an assessed tax is reduced or a tax rebate 
granted by final and binding judicial ruling or as a result of such a ruling, interest shall accrue on the 
amount to be refunded or rebated from the date proceedings commence to the date of payment. Where 
the amount to be refunded is not paid until after legal proceedings have commenced, interest shall beg in 
to accrue from the date of payment.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall apply accordingly where  
1. the legal dispute is settled by cancellation of or amendment to the administrative act being 
disputed or by issue of the administrative act being requested, or  
2. a final and binding judicial ruling or an incontestable administrative act through which the 
dispute is settled leads  
a) to the reduction of the tax assessed in a follow -up notice,  
b) to the reduction of trade tax following amendment to the base amoun t of trade tax.  
(3) Interest shall not be charged on an amount to be refunded or rebated where the participant has been 
ordered to pay the costs of legal remedy pursuant to section 137, first sentence, of the Code of 
Procedure for Fiscal Courts.  
(4) Inter est amounts pursuant to section 233a which have been assessed for the same period shall be 
credited.  
(5) A notice of interest amounts shall not be cancelled or amended when the tax assessment notice is 
cancelled, amended or corrected pursuant to section 12 9 following conclusion of the legal remedy 
proceedings.  
Section 237  
Interest while implementation is suspended  
(1) Where an objection or an action for rescission against a tax assessment notice, a self -assessed tax 
return or an administrative act which can cels or amends a tax rebate notice, or against an objection 
ruling on one of these administrative acts, has not led to the desired result and can no longer be 
appealed, interest shall be charged on the owed amount with respect to which implementation of th e 
disputed administrative act was suspended. The first sentence above shall apply accordingly where Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 102 of 141 implementation of a follow -up notice has been suspended following the submission of a formal out -of-
court or court appeal against a basic assessment notice (section 171(10)) or an appeals ruling on a 
basic assessment notice.  
(2) Interest shall be levied from the date when  the authority whose administrative act is being challenged 
receives the out -of-court appeal or from the date when judicial proceedings comm ence to the date when 
the suspension of implementation ends. Where implementation is not suspended until after the out -of-
court appeal has been received or the proceedings have commenced, interest shall be charged from the 
date when the suspension of imple mentation takes effect.  
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) above shall apply accordingly where implementation of a notice specifying 
the base amount of trade tax or a trade tax assessment notice is suspended following suspension of the 
implementation of an income  tax assessment notice, a corporation tax assessment notice or a notice of 
determination.  
(4) Section 234(2) and (3) shall apply accordingly.  
(5) A notice of interest amounts shall not be cancelled or amended when the tax assessment notice is 
cancelled, am ended or corrected pursuant to section 129 following conclusion of the legal remedy 
proceedings.  
Section 238  
Amount and calculation of interest  
(1) The interest shall be one half percent for every month. It shall be payable only for full months from 
the da te of commencement of the accrual period; uncompleted months shall not be included. Where the 
claim on which interest is chargeable is settled by set -off, the date on which the debt of the person 
seeking set -off becomes due shall be deemed to be the date o f payment.  
(2) In calculating interest, the amount on which interest is chargeable shall be rounded down for every 
type of tax to the next figure divisible by 50 euros.  
Section 239  
Interest assessment  
(1) The provisions applicable to taxes shall apply acco rdingly to interest, but the period for assessment 
shall consist of one year. The period for assessment shall begin:  
1. in the cases described in section 233a, at the end of the calendar year in which the tax was 
assessed, cancelled, amended or corrected p ursuant to section 129,  
2. in the cases described in section 234, at the end of the calendar year in which the 
deferment has ended,  
3. in the cases described in section 235, at the end of the calendar year in which the 
assessment of the evaded taxes has be come final and binding, but not before the end of the calendar 
year in which criminal proceedings initiated have been closed and can no longer be appealed,  
4. in the cases described in section 236, at the end of the calendar year in which the tax has 
been refunded or the tax rebate paid out,  
5. in the cases described in section 237, at the end of the calendar year in which an objection 
or action for rescission has not led to the desired result and can no longer be appealed.  
The period for assessment for th e cases described in section 233a shall not expire for as long as the tax 
assessment, its cancellation, its amendment or its correction pursuant to section 129 is still permissible.  
(2) Interest shall be rounded to the full euro in the taxpayer’s favour. I t shall be assessed only where it 
amounts to at least 10 euros.  
(3) If tax bases are determined separately or if a base amount for a non -personal tax is assessed, the 
bases for assessing interest  
1.  under section 233a in cases where section 233a(2a) appli es or  
2.  under section 235  
are to be determined separately to the extent that they relate to matters that are the subject of the basic 
assessment notice.  
(4) If interest in accordance with section 233a is assessed on a self -assessed tax return – which is  
deemed equivalent to a tax assessment subject to review under the first sentence of section 168 – such 
interest assessment shall  likewise be subject to review.  
2nd Subchapter  
Late -payment penalties  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 103 of 141 Section 240  
Late -payment penalties  
(1) Where a tax is not  paid by the end of the due date, a late -payment penalty of 1 percent of the 
rounded tax amount in arrears shall be payable for each month of default; the amount shall be rounded 
down to the nearest amount divisible by 50 euros. The same shall apply to rep ayable tax rebates and 
debts from liability to the extent that the liability extends to taxes and repayable tax rebates. Default 
pursuant to the first sentence above shall not be deemed to have occurred before the tax has been 
assessed or declared. Where t he assessment of a tax or tax rebate is cancelled, amended or corrected 
pursuant to section 129, the late -payment penalties effected up to this point shall remain unaffected; the 
same shall apply where a notice of liability is withdrawn, revoked or correct ed pursuant to section 129. 
Where the claim is settled by set -off, the late -payment penalties which have accrued up to the due date 
of the debt of the person seeking set -off shall remain unaffected.  
(2) Late -payment penalties shall not arise with regard to  ancillary tax payments.  
(3) No late -payment penalty shall be levied for defaults of up to three days. This shall not apply to 
payments pursuant to section 224(2) number 1.  
(4) In cases of joint and several debt, late -payment penalties shall arise with res pect to each joint and 
several debtor in default. However, the total value of the late -payment penalties to be paid shall not be 
higher than that had the default occurred on the part of one joint and several debtor only.  
Third Chapter  
Provision of collater al  
Section 241  
Nature of collateral  
(1) Whoever is required under the tax laws to provide collateral may do so:  
1. by depositing with the competent revenue authority means of payment in circulation in the 
territory of application of this Code,  
2. by pledg ing the securities named in subsection (2) below and which are entrusted for 
custody by the person obliged to provide the collateral to the Bundesbank or a credit institution which 
is licensed to operate a security deposit business, provided that no other rights take priority over the 
pledgee’s right. The liability of securities for amounts owing to the custodian for their custody and 
administration shall remain unaffected. The pledging of securities shall be deemed equivalent to the 
pledging of shares in a  collective securities holding pursuant to section 6 of the Securities Deposit Act 
as published in the revised version in the Federal Law Gazette, Part III, number 4130 -1, as amended 
by Article 1 of the Act of 17 July 1985 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 1507),  
3. by pledging savings, accompanied by the surrender of the savings bank book, in a credit 
institution which is licensed to operate a deposit -taking business within the territory of application of 
this Code, provided that no other rights take priority ove r the pledgee’s right,  
4. by pledging receivables which are entered in a debt register of the Federation, or a special 
fund of the Federation or a Land , provided that no other rights take priority over the pledgee’s right,  
5. by creating  
a) first mortgage s, land charges or annuity charges on real property or hereditary building 
rights which are situated within the territory of application of this Code,  
b) first maritime mortgages on ships, ships under construction or floating docks which are 
entered in a r egister of ships or ship construction register kept within the territory of 
application of this Code,  
6. by pledging receivables for which a first ordinary mortgage on real property or hereditary 
building rights situated within the territory of application  of this Code exists, or by pledging first Land  
charges or annuity charges on real property or hereditary building rights situated within the territory of 
application of this Code, where no priority rights to these receivables, Land  charges or annuity 
charges exist,  
7. by way of debt commitment, guarantee or obligations under bills of exchange provided by a 
suitable tax guarantor (section 244).  
(2) Securities within the meaning of subsection (1) number 2 above shall be  
1. bonds issued by the Federation, a s pecial fund of the Federation, a Land , a municipality or 
an association of municipalities,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 104 of 141 2. bonds of international facilities to which the Federation has transferred sovereign rights, 
where they are licensed to trade on official bourses within the territ ory of application of this Code,  
3.  bonds issued by the Deutsche Genossenschaftsbank, the Deutsche Siedlungs - und 
Land esrentenbank , the Deutsche Ausgleichsbank, the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau and the 
Land wirtschaftliche Rentenbank , 
4. Pfandbriefs , mun icipal bonds and related bonds,  
5. Bonds, the interest and redemption of which are guaranteed by the Federation or by a 
Land . 
(3) A bonded warehouse of taxable goods shall be deemed to be adequate collateral for the tax imposed 
thereon.  
Section 242  
The eff ect of depositing means of payment  
Means of payment which are deposited pursuant to section 241(1) number 1 shall become the property 
of the political subdivision to which the revenue authority with which they were deposited belongs. No 
interest shall be c harged on the claim for repayment. Upon deposit, the political subdivision whose claim 
is to be secured by the deposit shall acquire a lien on the claim to reimbursement of the deposited 
means of payment.  
Section 243  
Pledging securities  
The provision of co llateral by pledging securities pursuant to section 241(1) number 2 shall be 
permissible only where the custodian assumes responsibility for guaranteeing the securities’ 
marketability. Assuming this responsibility shall include liability for ensuring that  
1. the right of reclaim of the depositor is not restricted by judicial bans and confiscation,  
2. that the entrusted securities are not registered as stolen or lost in the collective lists of 
called -up securities and are neither subject to payment blocks n or have been called in for cancellation 
or cancelled.  
3. that the securities are registered to the bearer, or, in the event that they are non -negotiable, 
bear a blank endorsement and are otherwise not blocked, and that the interest coupons and the 
renewal coupons are enclosed with the securities.  
Section 244  
Suitable tax guarantors  
(1) Debt commitments and guarantees pursuant to the Civil Code as well as obligations under bills of 
exchange set out in Articles 28 or 78 of the Bills of Exchange Act shall be d eemed suitable as collateral 
only where these have been provided or entered into by persons who  
1. possess sufficient assets to cover the extent of the collateral to be provided, and  
2. have their general or an agreed jurisdiction within the territory of a pplication of this Code.  
Guarantees shall include the waiver of the defence of unexhausted remedies pursuant to section 771 of 
the Civil Code. Debt commitments and guarantee declarations shall be issued in writing; electronic 
versions shall not be permitt ed. The guarantor and the secured party may not provide reciprocal 
collateral for each other, nor may they be economically related. The Central Customs Authority shall 
decide on the acceptance of guarantee declarations in procedures pursuant to the ATA Con vention of 6 
December 1961 (Federal Law Gazette II 1965, p. 948) and the TIR Convention of 14 November 1975 
(Federal Law Gazette II 1979, p. 445), as amended. The Central Customs Authority shall decide on the 
acceptance of declarations on individual guaran tees in the form of guarantee vouchers pursuant to 
Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/93 of 2 July 1993 laying down provisions for the implementation 
of Council Regulation (EEC) 2913/92 establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 253, p. 1) and 
the Conv ention of 20 May 1987 on a common transit procedure (OJ L 226, p. 2), as amended.  
(2) The Central Customs Authority may authorise credit institutions and insurance companies providing 
collateral for others on a commercial basis to act in general as tax gua rantor where they are licensed to 
operate within the territory of application of this Code. A maximum amount (guarantee amount) shall be 
set when issuing authorisation. The total amount of liabilities assumed by the tax guarantor from debt 
commitments, gua rantees and obligations under bills of exchange vis -à-vis the revenue administration 
may not exceed the guarantee amount.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 105 of 141 (3) The Federal Ministry of Finance shall be authorised to issue ordinances with the consent of the 
Bundesrat that delegate the powers  under subsection (1), sixth sentence, and section (2) to one or more 
main customs offices.  
Section 245  
Other items as collateral  
The revenue authority may at its own discretion accept as collateral items other than those described in 
section 241. Preferen ce shall be given to assets which offer enhanced security or which upon the onset 
of even extraordinary circumstances can be realised without considerable difficulty and within a suitable 
timeframe.  
Section 246  
Acceptance value  
The revenue authority shall determine at its own discretion the values at which objects may be accepted 
as collateral. However, the acceptance value may not exceed the expected proceeds of realisation 
minus the costs of realisation. It may not be below the values named in section 234 (3), section 236 and 
section 237, first sentence, of the Civil Code for objects described in section 241(1) numbers 2 and 4 
and for movable items which are accepted as collateral pursuant to section 245.  
Section 247  
The exchange of collateral  
Whoever has p rovided collateral pursuant to sections 241 to 245 shall be entitled to replace the collateral 
or part of the collateral with other suitable collateral pursuant to sections 241 to 244.  
Section 248  
Obligation to provide additional collateral  
Collateral shal l be supplemented, or other collateral provided, where collateral already provided 
becomes inadequate.  
Sixth Part  
Enforcement  
First Chapter  
General provisions  
Section 249  
Enforcement authorities  
(1) The revenue authorities may, by administrative decision, enforce administrative acts ordering a 
monetary payment, other performance, tolerance or omission of a particular action. This shall also apply 
to self -assessed tax returns (section 168). Enforcement authorities shall be the tax offices and main 
customs of fices as well as Land  revenue authorities that have been given jurisdiction, throughout a given 
Land , over cash transactions and collection procedures, including enforcement, on the basis of an 
ordinance pursuant to section 17(2), third sentence, number 3 of the Fiscal Administration Act; section 
328(1), third sentence, shall remain unaffected.  
(2) For the purposes of preparing enforcement, the revenue authorities may determine the financial 
circumstances and income of the judgement debtor. The revenue auth ority may use information known 
to it, protected pursuant to section 30, which they are entitled to utilise in enforcing taxes and ancillary 
tax payments, for enforcement owing to monetary payments other than taxes and ancillary tax 
payments.  
Section 250  
Request for recovery  
(1) Insofar as one enforcement authority carries out enforcement measures at the request of another 
enforcement authority, the requested enforcement authority shall take the place of the other enforcement 
authority. The requesting enfor cement authority shall remain responsible for the enforceability of the 
claim.  
(2) Where the requested enforcement authority does not believe it has jurisdiction or believes the action 
requested of it is impermissible, it shall inform the requesting enforc ement authority of its reservations. 
Where the requesting authority insists that the request be carried out and the requested authority 
declines, the supervisory authority of the requested authority shall decide.  
Section 251  
Enforceable administrative acts  
(1) Administrative acts may be enforced insofar as their execution has not been suspended or their 
execution has not been blocked by the lodging of an appeal (section 361; section 69 of the Code of 
Procedure for Fiscal Courts). Furthermore, import and exp ort duty assessment notices may be enforced Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 106 of 141 only insofar as the customs debtor’s obligation to pay duty has not been suspended (Article 108(3) of the 
Union Customs Code).  
(2) The provisions of the Insolvency Code as well as section 79(2) of the Federal Con stitutional Court 
Act shall remain unaffected. The revenue authority shall, in the cases referred to in section 201(2), 
sections 257 and 308(1) of the Insolvency Code, be entitled to carry out enforcement measures against 
the debtor by administrative decis ion. 
(3) Where the revenue authority asserts a claim arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship as a 
creditor’s claim in insolvency proceedings, the revenue authority shall, where necessary, establish the 
creditor’s claim by virtue of written admini strative act.  
Section 252  
Judgement creditor  
In the enforcement proceedings, the body to which the enforcement authority belongs shall be the 
creditor for the claims to be enforced.  
Section 253  
Judgement debtor  
The judgement debtor shall be the person agai nst whom enforcement proceedings are directed pursuant 
to section 249.  
Section 254  
Preconditions for commencing with enforcement  
(1) Unless otherwise stipulated, enforcement may only commence if payment is due and a demand for 
payment or tolerance or omiss ion of an action (demand for payment) has been issued to the judgement 
debtor and at least one week has elapsed since issue of the request. The demand for payment may be 
issued in combination with the administrative act to be enforced. A demand for payment  shall also be 
necessary where the administrative act also takes effect against the judgement debtor without him 
having been notified. Insofar as the judgement debtor has not made a payment owed by him on the 
basis of a self -assessed tax return, a demand f or payment shall not be required.  
(2) A demand for payment of a late -payment penalty and interest shall not be required where they are 
recovered together with the tax. This shall apply mutatis mutandis  to the enforcement costs where they 
are recovered toge ther with the principal claim.  
Section 255  
Enforcement against legal persons under public law  
(1) Enforcement against the Federation or a Land  shall not be permissible. In other respects, 
enforcement against legal persons under public law who are subject t o state supervision shall only be 
permissible with the approval of the relevant supervisory authority. The supervisory authority shall 
determine the time of the enforcement and the assets upon which enforcement may be levied.  
(2) The limitations of subsect ion (1) above shall not apply to public credit institutions.  
Section 256  
Objections to enforcement  
Objections to the administrative act to be enforced shall be raised outside of the enforcement 
proceedings using the legal remedies permitted for this purpos e. 
Section 257  
Stay and limitation of enforcement  
(1) Enforcement shall be stayed or limited as soon as  
1. the preconditions for enforcement set out in section 251(1) no longer apply,  
2. the administrative act which serves as the basis for enforcement is c ancelled,  
3. the claim to payment has expired,  
4. the payment has been deferred.  
(2) In the cases referred to in subsection (1) numbers 2 and 3 above enforcement measures that have 
already been undertaken shall be cancelled. Where the administrative act h as been cancelled by a court 
decision, this shall only apply insofar as the decision has become incontestable and there is no need to 
issue a new administrative act as a result of the decision. In other respects, the enforcement measures 
shall remain in pl ace insofar as their cancellation has not been expressly ordered.  
Section 258  
Temporary stay or limitation of enforcement  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 107 of 141 Insofar as enforcement proves inequitable in individual cases, the enforcement authority may temporarily 
stay or limit enforcement or cancel an enforcement measure.  
Second Chapter  
Enforcement owing to monetary claims  
1st Subchapter  
General provisions  
Section 259  
Formal reminder  
In general, a formal reminder requesting payment within one week is to be sent to the judgement debtor 
before t he commencement of enforcement. A formal reminder shall not be required where the judgement 
debtor receives a reminder of the payment before the due date. General payment reminders may also 
take the form of a public notice.  
Section 260  
Statement of the rea son for the indebtedness  
The enforcement order or the attachment order shall state the reason for which the monetary amounts to 
be recovered are owed.  
Section 261  
Write -off 
Claims arising from the tax debtor -creditor relationship may be written off if it i s expected that  
1.  the collection of the amount in question will be unsuccessful or   
2.  the costs of collection will be disproportionate to the amount to be collected.  
Section 262  
Third party rights  
(1) Where a third party asserts that he has a right blo cking the sale of the object of enforcement or 
objections are raised pursuant to sections 772 to 774 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the objection to the 
enforcement shall, where necessary, be raised by bringing an action before the ordinary courts. A thir d 
party shall also be deemed to be a person who is obliged to tolerate enforcement against an asset 
managed by him where he asserts that objects belonging to him are affected by the enforcement. The 
rights blocking the sale shall be determined by civil law . 
(2) Sections 769 and 770 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply with respect to the stay of 
enforcement and the cancellation of enforcement measures.  
(3) The action shall only be brought before the court in whose district the enforcement takes place.  
Where the action is brought against the body to which the enforcement authority belongs and against the 
judgement debtor, they shall be deemed to be joined parties.  
Section 263  
Enforcement against spouses  
The provisions of sections 739, 740, 741, 743, 744 a and 745 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply 
accordingly to enforcement against spouses or civil partners.  
Section 264  
Enforcement against the usufructuary  
The provision of section 737 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply accordingly to enfor cement 
against properties subject to the usufruct of an asset.  
Section 265  
Enforcement against heirs  
The provisions of sections 1958, 1960(3) and section 1961 of the Civil Code and sections 747, 748, 778, 
779, and 781 to 784 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply accordingly to enforcement against heirs.  
Section 266  
Other cases of limited liability  
The provisions of sections 781 to 784 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply accordingly to the 
limited liability arising pursuant to section 1489 of the  Civil Code, and the provision of section 781 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure shall apply to the limited liability arising pursuant to sections 1480, 1504 and 
2187 of the Civil Code.  
Section 267  
Enforcement proceedings against associations without legal cap acity  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 108 of 141 An enforceable administrative act against an association shall suffice for enforcement against its assets 
in the case of associations without legal capacity that are taxable as such. This shall apply accordingly to 
special -purpose funds and other tax able entities similar to a legal person.  
2nd Subchapter  
Apportionment of a joint and several obligation  
Section 268  
General  
Where persons are joint and several debtors because they have been jointly assessed for an income tax 
or capital tax, each of them m ay apply for enforcement of this tax to be limited respectively to the amount 
resulting in accordance with sections 269 to 278 where taxes are apportioned.  
Section 269  
Application  
(1) The application shall be submitted in written or electronic form to, or lodged orally at, the tax office 
that is responsible for the taxation of income or capital at the time the application is submitted.  
 (2) The application may be made at the earliest following notification of the demand for payment. An 
application shall be no longer permissible once tax arrears have been paid in full. The application shall 
contain all the information required to apportion the tax insofar as this information is not contained in the 
tax return.  
Section 270  
General apportionment formula  
Tax arr ears shall be apportioned in proportion to the amounts which would result from individual 
assessment in accordance with section 26a of the Income Tax Act and sections 271 to 276. The actual 
and legal findings used for the tax assessment in the case of join t assessment shall be decisive insofar 
as the application of the provisions on individual assessment does not lead to deviations.  
Section 271  
Apportionment formula for capital tax  
Capital tax shall be apportioned as follows:  
1. Subject to the deviations in  numbers 2 and 3 below, the provisions of the Valuation Act and 
the Capital Tax Act as used as the basis for joint assessment shall be assumed in calculating the 
assets and the capital tax of the individual joint and several debtor.  
2. A spouse’s or civil partner’s assets, which in the case of joint assessment were attributed to 
the other spouse or civil partner as agricultural and forestry assets or as business assets, shall be 
treated as own agricultural and forestry assets or own business assets.  
3. Debts which are not economically related to particular assets allocated to a joint and several 
debtor shall be deducted in equal shares from the individual joint and several debtors, insofar as it is 
not possible to establish a particular debtor.  
Section 272  
Apportionment formula for prepayments  
(1) Prepayments outstanding shall be apportioned in proportion to the amounts which would result from 
a separate assessment of the prepayments. An application for appointment of prepayments shall 
simultaneously be deeme d to be an application for apportionment of additional prepayments falling due 
in the same assessment period and of any final payment. A final apportionment shall be conducted once 
the assessment has been performed. The total tax minus the amounts which ha ve not been included in 
the apportionment of the prepayments shall be apportioned. In doing so, every joint and several debtor 
shall be credited with the amounts paid by him towards the apportioned prepayments. Where this results 
in overpayment compared to  the amount of apportionment, the amount overpaid shall be refunded.  
(2) Where the prepayments are apportioned only once assessment has taken place, the apportionment 
formula applicable for the assessed tax shall be used.  
Section 273  
Apportionment formula for tax deficiencies  
(1) Where the amendment of a tax assessment or its correction pursuant to section 129 leads to a tax 
deficiency, the tax arrears arising from the deficiency shall be apportioned in proportion to the excess 
amounts which result from a c omparison of the corrected individual assessments with the earlier 
individual assessments.  
(2) The apportionment formula referred to in subsection (1) above shall not apply where the tax hitherto 
assessed has not yet been repaid.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 109 of 141 Section 274  
Special apport ionment formula  
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 270 to 273, the tax arrears may be apportioned according to a 
formula jointly proposed by the joint and several debtors, if repayment is guaranteed. The joint proposal 
shall be lodged in writing or  declared for record; it shall be signed by all joint and several debtors.  
Sect ion 275  
(rescinded)  
Section 276  
Tax arrears, commencement of enforcement  
(1) Where the application is lodged with the revenue authority prior to the commencement of 
enforcement,  the tax due at the time of receipt of the application for apportionment shall be apportioned.  
(2) Where the application is lodged after enforcement commences, the tax that is due at the time 
enforcement commences, and that is the subject of enforcement pr oceedings,  shall be apportioned.  
(3) Withheld taxes and separately assessed prepayments shall also be included in the apportionment 
even if they were paid before the application was lodged.  
(4) Tax arrears shall also include late -payment penalties, interes t and late -filing penalties.  
(5) Enforcement shall be deemed commenced when the notice of arrears is issued.  
(6) Payments that have been made by a joint and several debtor after submission of an application 
under subsection (1) above or after enforcement c ommences under subsection (2) above, or that are to 
be included in an apportionment under subsection (3) above, shall be credited to the debtor who made 
the payments or for whom the payments have been made. Where, in doing so, this results in an 
overpaymen t compared with the amount of apportionment, the overpayment shall be refunded.  
Section 277  
Enforcement  
As long as no incontestable decision has been taken regarding the application for the limitation of the 
enforcement, enforcement measures may only be im plemented to the extent that this is necessary to 
secure the claim.  
Secti on 278  
Limitation of enforcement  
(1) Following apportionment, the enforcement may only be implemented in accordance with the amounts 
attributable to the individual debtors.  
(2) Where assets are given to a tax debtor free of charge by a person assessed with him during or after 
the assessment period for which tax arrears still exist, tax may, until the expiration of the tenth calendar 
month from the date of the issuance of the apportionm ent notice, be claimed from the recipient above 
and beyond the amount resulting pursuant to subsection (1) above up to the fair market value of this 
donation in kind. This shall not apply to common occasional gifts.  
Section 279  
Form and content of the appo rtionment notice  
(1) Once enforcement has commenced, a uniformly applicable decision on the application to limit 
enforcement shall be communicated to the parties involved in the form of an apportionment notice issued 
in writing or electronically. However, no decision shall be required if no enforcement measures are taken 
or if enforcement measures already taken are rescinded.  
(2) The apportionment notice shall indicate the amount of the proportional tax payable by each joint and 
several debtor; it shall be accompanied by instructions indicating which legal remedy is permissible, and 
the time period within which and the authority to which this remedy must be submitted. The notice should 
further include:  
1. the amount of the tax to be apportioned,  
2. the point  in time decisive for the calculation of the tax arrears,  
3. the extent of the tax bases which have been attributed to the individual joint and several 
debtors where there is divergence from the information provided by the joint and several debtors,  
4. the amount of the tax payable by the individual joint and several debtors in the case of 
individual assessment (section 270),  
5. the amounts to be credited against the joint and several debtor’s apportioned tax.  
Section 280  
Amendments to the apportionment not ice 
(1) Except in the cases referred to in section 129, the apportionment notice may only be amended where  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 110 of 141 1. it subsequently becomes known that the apportionment is based on incorrect information 
and the tax arrears could not be recovered in whole or in p art as a result of incorrect apportionment,  
2. the tax arrears increase or decrease through the cancellation or amendment of the tax 
assessment or its correction pursuant to section 129.  
(2) After the termination of enforcement, an amendment to the apporti onment notice or the correction 
thereof pursuant to section 129 shall no longer be permissible.  
3rd Subchapter  
Enforcement against movable assets  
I. General  
Section 281  
Attachment  
(1) Enforcement against movable assets shall be effected by attachment.  
(2) Attachment may not be expanded further than is necessary to cover the monetary amounts to be 
recovered and the costs of enforcement.  
(3) The attachment shall not be made where an excess over the cost of the enforcement cannot be 
expected from the realisati on of the attachable objects.  
Section 282  
Effect of the attachment  
(1) Attachment shall result in the body to which the enforcement authority belongs acquiring a lien on the 
attached object.  
(2) The lien shall grant the body in proportion to other creditor s the same rights as a lien within the 
meaning of the Civil Code; liens and preferential rights which are not treated as equivalent to this lien in 
insolvency proceedings shall have priority.  
(3) A lien imposed on the basis of a previous attachment shall h ave priority other a lien imposed on the 
basis of a later attachment.  
Section 283  
Exclusion of warranty claims  
Where an object is sold as a result of the attachment, the buyer shall not be entitled to assert warranty 
claims for a defect of title or for a d efect in the items sold.  
Section 284  
Judgement debtor’s asset disclosure  
(1) For the enforcement of a receivable, the judgement debtor shall provide information about his assets 
to the enforcement authority in accordance with the following provisions where  he fails to settle the claim 
within two weeks of the enforcement authority having called upon him to pay, making reference to the 
obligation to provide the asset disclosure. In addition he shall state his birth name, date of birth and 
place of birth. Wher e the judgement debtor is a legal person or an association, then he shall state his 
company name, the number of the page in the commercial register and his registered office.  
(2) For the purpose of providing information, the judgement debtor shall state al l of the assets belonging 
to him. In the case of receivables, the reason and evidence shall be specified. Furthermore, the following 
shall be indicated:  
1.  the disposals for a consideration by the judgement debtor to a related person (section 138 
of the I nsolvency Code) which he has provided in the last two years prior to the deadline pursuant to 
subsection (7) below and until provision of the asset disclosure;  
2.  the services provided free of charge by the judgement debtor which he has provided in the 
last four years prior to the deadline pursuant to subsection (7) below and until provision of asset 
disclosure, insofar as they were not related to common occasional gifts of a low value.  
Items not subject to attachment pursuant to section 811(1), numbers 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure need not be included unless an attachment  in exchange may be considered.  
(3) The judgement debtor shall make a sworn statement to be recorded in writing to the effect that he 
has provided the details pursuant to subsect ions (1) and (2) above correctly and completely to the best 
of his knowledge and belief. Prior to administration of the sworn statement of assets, the judgement 
debtor shall be instructed of the meaning of the sworn statement assets, especially the consequ ences 
under criminal law of making an incorrect or incomplete sworn statement of assets.  
(4) A judgement debtor who has provided the asset disclosure described in this provision or in section 
802c of the Code of Civil Procedure within the last two years sh all be obliged to provide another only 
where it is to be presumed that his financial circumstances have changed substantially. The enforcement Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 111 of 141 authority shall establish ex officio whether an inventory of assets produced on the basis of the debtor’s 
asset d isclosure has been deposited with the central court of enforcement pursuant to section 802k(1) of 
the Code of Civil Procedure within the last two years.  
(5) The enforcement authority in whose district the judgement debtor’s residence or abode is located 
shall be responsible for taking down the asset disclosure. Where these preconditions are not met at the 
enforcement authority which is pursuing the enforcement, the enforcement authority may take down the 
asset disclosure where the judgement debtor is prepar ed to provide it.  
(6) The summons to the appointment to provide the asset disclosure shall be served on the judgement 
debtor himself; it may be tied to the deadline pursuant to subsection (1), first sentence, above. The 
appointment for providing the asset disclosure should not be set before the expiration of one month after 
service of the summons. An appeal against the order to provide the asset disclosure shall not have the 
effect of delaying proceedings. The judgement debtor shall provide the documents re quired for the asset 
disclosure at the appointment. Upon service of the summons, the judgement debtor shall be instructed 
about these rules, about his rights and obligations pursuant to subsections (2) and (3) above, about the 
consequences of failing to ke ep an appointment without giving notice or of a breach of his obligation to 
provide information, and about the possibility of entry into the register of debtors when providing the 
asset disclosure.  
(7) At the appointment to provide the asset disclosure, th e enforcement authority shall create an 
electronic document containing the details required pursuant to subsections (1) and (2) above (inventory 
of assets). These details shall be read out to the judgement debtor before the provision of the sworn 
statement  pursuant to subsection (3) above or reproduced on a screen for inspection. He is to be given a 
printout on demand. The enforcement authority shall deposit the inventory of assets with the central 
court of enforcement pursuant to section 802k(1) of the Cod e of Civil Procedure. The form, recording 
and transfer of the inventory of assets shall conform to the specifications of the ordinance pursuant to 
section 802k(4) of the Code of Civil Procedure.  
(8) Where the judgement debtor fails to present himself witho ut sufficient justification at the appointment 
scheduled for the provision of the asset disclosure before the enforcement authority described in 
subsection (5), first sentence, above or where he refuses without reason to provide the asset disclosure, 
the e nforcement authority pursuing enforcement may apply for the ordering of arrest so as to force 
provision. The local court in whose district the judgement debtor has his residence or, in the absence of 
such, has his abode at the time the deadline is set, sha ll be responsible for the ordering of arrest. 
Sections 802g to 802j of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply accordingly. A bailiff shall conduct the 
arrest of the judgement debtor. Section 292 of this Code shall apply accordingly. Following the arrest o f 
the judgement debtor, the asset disclosure may be taken down by the bailiff responsible pursuant to 
section 802i of the Code of Civil Procedure where the seat of the enforcement authority described in 
subsection (5) above is not located in the district o f the local court responsible for the bailiff or where it is 
not possible for the enforcement authority to take down the asset disclosure. The local court decision 
through which the application of the enforcement authority for an order for arrest is reject ed shall be 
subject to the appeal procedure pursuant to sections 567 to 577 of the Code of Civil Procedure.  
(9) The enforcement authority may order the entry of the judgement debtor into the register of debtors 
pursuant to section 882h(1) of the Code of Ci vil Procedure where  
1.  the judgement debtor has failed to meet his obligation to provide the asset disclosure,  
2.  enforcement pursuant to the content of the inventory of assets would not be suitable for 
achieving full payment of the receivable on accoun t of which the asset disclosure was demanded or 
on account of which the enforcement authority, subject to the deadline pursuant to subsection (1), 
first sentence, above, and the blocking effect pursuant to subsection (4) above, could demand an 
asset disclo sure, or  
3.  the judgement debtor fails within one month of providing the asset disclosure to pay the 
receivable on account of which the asset disclosure was demanded. The same shall apply where the 
enforcement authority, subject to the deadline pursuant to subsection (1), first sentence, above and 
the blocking effect pursuant to subsection (4) above, may demand an asset disclosure insofar as the 
judgement debtor fails to pay the receivable within once month of him having being instructed of the 
possibilit y of entry into the register of debtors.  
The order for entry should be briefly substantiated. It is to be served on the judgement debtor. Section 
882c(3) of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply accordingly.  
(10) An appeal against the order for entry pur suant to subsection (9) above shall not have the effect of 
delaying proceedings. Following the expiry of one month from service, the enforcement authority shall 
electronically transmit the order for entry to the central court of enforcement pursuant to sec tion 882h(1) 
of the Code of Civil Procedure together with the data designated in section 882b(2) and (3) of the Code 
of Civil Procedure. This shall not apply where applications for the granting of suspension of Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 112 of 141 implementation of the order for entry pursuan t to section 361 of this Code or section 69 of the Code of 
Procedure for Fiscal Courts are pending which have prospects of success.  
(11) Where entry into the register of debtors pursuant to section 882h(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure 
has been made, the decisions about the appeals of the judgement debtor against the order for entry by 
the enforcement authority or by the central court of enforcement pursuant to section 882h(1) of the Code 
of Civil Procedure shall be transmitted electronically. The form and  transfer of the order for entry 
pursuant to subsection (10), first and second sentences, above as well as the decision pursuant to the 
first sentence above shall conform to the specifications of the ordinance pursuant to section 882h(3) of 
the Code of Civ il Procedure.  
II. Enforcement against items  
Section 28 5 
Enforcement officer  
(1) The enforcement authority shall effect enforcement against movable items through enforcement 
officers.  
(2) The enforcement officer shall be empowered to conduct enforcement aga inst the judgement debtor 
and third parties by means of written or electronic order from the enforcement authority; the order shall 
be presented on demand.  
Section 286  
Enforcement against items  
(1) The enforcement officer shall attach items in the possessi on of the judgement debtor by seizing 
them.  
(2) Items other than money, valuables and securities shall be left in the possession of the judgement 
debtor where this does not jeopardise satisfaction of the claim. Where the items remain in the 
possession of t he judgement debtor, attachment shall only take effect where it is made apparent by 
affixing seals or some other means.  
(3) The enforcement officer shall inform the judgement debtor of the attachment.  
(4) These provisions shall also apply to the attachment  of items in the possession of a third party who is 
prepared to return them.  
Section 287  
Powers of the enforcement officer  
(1) The enforcement officer shall have the power to search the judgement debtor’s living quarters and 
business premises as well as co ntainers where the purpose of the enforcement so requires.  
(2) The enforcement officer shall be authorised to have locked doors and containers opened.  
(3) Where the enforcement officer meets with resistance, he may use force and request the support of 
police officers for this purpose.  
(4) Without his consent, the judgement debtor’s living quarters and business premises may only be 
searched on the basis of a court order. This shall not apply where obtaining the order would jeopardise 
the success of the searc h. The local court in whose district the search is to be undertaken shall be 
responsible for the court order for the search.  
(5) Where the judgement debtor agrees to the search or an order against the judgement debtor has been 
issued pursuant to subsection  (4), first sentence, above or is unnecessary pursuant to subsection (4), 
second sentence, above, persons who share custody of the judgement debtor’s living quarters of 
business premises shall tolerate the search. Undue hardship for the joint custodians sh all be avoided.  
(6) The order pursuant to subsection (4) above shall be presented during enforcement.  
Section 288  
Enlistment of witnesses  
Where an act of enforcement is met with resistance or where neither the judgement debtor nor an adult 
family member, a dult permanent joint resident, or person employed by the judgement debtor is present 
during an act of enforcement in the living quarters or business premises of the judgement debtor, the 
enforcement officer shall enlist two adults or one municipal or polic e officer as witness(es).  
Section 289  
Period of enforcement  
(1) An act of enforcement may be conducted at night (section 758a(4), second sentence, of the Code of 
Civil Procedure) as well as on Sundays and officially recognised general public holidays only with the 
written or electronic permission of the enforcement authority.  
(2) The permission shall be presented on demand during the act of enforcement.  
Section 290  
Enforcement officer’s requests and notifications  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 113 of 141 The requests and other notifications consti tuting part of the acts of enforcement shall be issued verbally 
by the enforcement officer and recorded in full; where they cannot be issued verbally, the enforcement 
authority shall send the person to whom the summons or notification is to be presented a copy of the 
written record.  
Section 291  
Record  
(1) The enforcement officer shall keep a record to every act of enforcement.  
(2) The record shall contain:  
1. the place and time of recording,  
2. the object of the act of enforcement, with a brief description of the measures,  
3. the names of the persons with whom negotiations have been held,  
4. the signatures of the persons and the note that a signature was provided after the record 
was read out or presented for inspection and after approval,  
5. the signature o f the enforcement officer.  
(3) Where it is not possible to satisfy one of the requirements pursuant to subsection (2) number 4 
above, the reason shall be stated.  
(4) The record may also be produced electronically. Subsection (2) numbers 4 and 5 above as w ell as 
section 87a(4), second sentence, shall not apply.  
Section 292  
Averting attachment  
(1) The judgement debtor may only avert attachment where he pays the due amount to the enforcement 
officer or demonstrates that he has been granted a period of grace f or payment or that the debt has 
expired.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall apply accordingly where the judgement debtor furnishes a ruling 
demonstrating the impermissibility of the attachment to be undertaken or where he furnishes post office 
or bank receipts  demonstrating that he has paid in the amount owed.  
Section 293  
Liens and preferential rights of third parties  
(1) A third party not in possession of the item may not raise an objection to the attachment of an item on 
the basis of a lien or preferential ri ght. He may, however, demand preferential satisfaction from the 
proceeds, irrespective of whether his receivable is due or not.  
(2) The ordinary court in whose district attachment has been made shall have sole responsibility for a 
claim for preferential sa tisfaction. Where the action is brought against a body to which the enforcement 
authority belongs and against the judgement debtor, they shall be deemed to be joined parties.  
Section 294  
Unpicked crops  
(1) Crops not yet separated from the ground may be att ached as long as they have not been seized 
through enforcement against immovable assets. They may not be attached earlier than one month prior 
to the usual time of ripening.  
(2) A creditor who has a right to satisfaction from the real property may appeal p ursuant to section 262 
against the attachment where a claim that has priority during enforcement against the real property is not 
being attached.  
Section 295  
Exemption of items from attachment  
Sections 811 to 812 and 813(1) to (3) of the Code of Civil Proc edure as well as the prohibitions and 
restrictions under other statutory provisions on the attachment of items shall apply accordingly. The 
enforcement authority shall take the place of the court with jurisdiction over enforcement.  
Section 296  
Realisation  
(1) Upon written order of the enforcement authority, the attached items shall be sold at public auction. 
“Public auction” shall mean  
1. an on -site auction, or  
2. a universally accessible Internet auction via the platform www.zoll -auktion.de.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 114 of 141 Such auction s hall normally be conducted by the enforcement officer. Section 292 shall apply 
accordingly.  
(2) In the case of the attachment of money, its removal shall count as payment by the debtor.  
Section 297  
Suspension of realisation  
The enforcement authority may te mporarily suspend the realisation of attached items by decreeing 
payment deadlines where immediate realisation would be unreasonable.  
Section 298  
Auction  
(1) The attached items may not be auctioned before one week has expired since attachment insofar as 
the judgement debtor has not declared that he agrees to an earlier auction or this is necessary to avert 
the threat of a considerable loss in value or to avoid disproportionate costs of lengthy retention.  
(2) The date and location of the auction shall be pub licly announced; a general description of the items to 
be auctioned shall be provided in the process. At the request of the enforcement authority, an officer of 
the municipality or a police officer shall attend the auction. The first and second sentences a bove shall 
not apply to an auction pursuant to section 296(1), second sentence, number 2.  
(3) Section 1239(1), first sentence, of the Civil Code shall apply accordingly; in the case of the on -site 
auction (section 296(1), second sentence, number 1), sectio n 1239(2) of the Civil Code shall apply 
accordingly as well.  
Section 299  
Knockdown  
(1) In the case of an on -site auction (section 296(1), second sentence, number 1), the knock -down to the 
highest bidder should be preceded by three calls. In the case of an Internet auction (section 296(1), 
second sentence, number 2), the knockdown shall be awarded to the person who has made the highest 
bid at the end of the auction, unless the auction is terminated prematurely; this person shall be informed 
of the acceptance  of the bid. Section 156 of the Civil Code shall apply accordingly.  
(2) The called item may only be handed over against payment in cash. In the case of an Internet auction, 
the called item may also be handed over if the payment is credited to the account o f the revenue 
authority. Where the called item is sent, the handing over shall be regarded as being effected upon 
surrender to the person designated to carry out the dispatch.  
(3) Where the highest bidder has not demanded the handing over against payment o f the sale price at 
the time specified in the auction rules or, in the absence of such a provision, before the end of the 
auction session, the item shall be otherwise auctioned. The highest bidder shall not be allowed to place 
another bid; he shall be liab le for the shortfall in proceeds, he shall have no claim on the additional 
proceeds.  
(4) Where the knockdown is awarded to the creditor, he shall be freed from the obligation to pay in cash 
insofar as the proceeds, following the deduction of the costs of e nforcement, are to be used to satisfy his 
claim. Insofar as the creditor is freed from the obligation to make a payment in cash, the amount shall be 
deemed to be paid from the debtor to the creditor.  
Section 300  
Lowest bid  
(1) The knockdown may only be awa rded for a bid of at least half of the usual sale value of the item 
(lowest bid). The usual sale value and the lowest bid should be published at the auction.  
(2) Where no knockdown is awarded because a bid matching the lowest bid has not been offered, the 
lien shall remain. The enforcement authority may set a new auction date at any time or order the 
realisation by other means pursuant to section 305 of the attached item. Where realisation by other 
means is ordered, subsection (1) above shall apply accordin gly. 
(3) Items made of gold or silver may not be knocked down at less than their gold or silver value. If no 
adequate bid for the knockdown is made, the item may be sold privately at the order of the enforcement 
authority. The sale price may not go below t he gold or silver value and half of the usual sale value.  
Section 301  
Ceasing the auction  
(1) The auction shall be ceased as soon as the proceeds are sufficient to cover the amounts to be 
recovered including the costs of enforcement.  
(2) Receipt of the pro ceeds by the auctioning official shall be deemed to be payment by the judgement 
debtor unless the proceeds are deposited (section 308(4)). In the case of an Internet auction, receipt of 
the proceeds on the account of the revenue authority shall be deemed t o be payment within the meaning 
of the first sentence above.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 115 of 141 Section 302  
Securities  
Attached securities with a stock exchange or market price shall be sold privately at the daily price; other 
securities shall be auctioned according to the general provision s. 
Section 30 3 
Registered securities  
Where an attached security is registered, the enforcement authority shall be entitled to effect the transfer 
of the security to the name of the purchaser or, where a bearer security that has been transferred is 
involved , the re -conversion into a bearer security, and to submit the necessary declaration in place of the 
judgement debtor.  
Section 304  
Auctioning unpicked crops  
Attached crops which have not yet been separated from the ground may only be auctioned after they 
have ripened. The enforcement officer shall have the crops harvested if he does not auction them before 
they are picked.  
Section 305  
Realisation in special circumstances  
Upon application by the judgement debtor or for special reasons of expediency, the enfo rcement 
authority may order an attached item to be realised in a manner or at a place other than that set out in 
the sections above or that the item be auctioned by a person other than the enforcement officer.  
Section 306  
Enforcement against spare aircraft  parts  
(1) Section 100 of the Act Governing Rights in Aircraft shall apply to enforcement against spare parts to 
which a registered lien on an aircraft extends pursuant to section 71 of the Act Governing Rights in 
Aircraft; the enforcement officer shall ta ke the place of the bailiff.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall apply to enforcement against spare parts to which the right in a foreign 
aircraft extends, subject to the proviso that the provisions of section 106(1), number 2, and 106(4) of the 
Act Governing R ights in Aircraft shall be taken into account.  
Section 307  
Subordinate attachment  
(1) For the purposes of attaching items that have already been attached, it shall be sufficient for the 
enforcement officer to make a declaration, of which a written record i s to be made, that he is attaching 
the item for the receivable to be described. The judgement debtor shall be informed of the additional 
attachment.  
(2) Where the first attachment is effected for another enforcement authority or made by a bailiff, this 
enforcement authority or the bailiff shall be sent a copy of the written record. The same obligation shall 
apply to a bailiff who attaches items which have already been attached on behalf of an enforcement 
authority.  
Section 308  
Realisation in the case of mul tiple attachment  
(1) Where the item is subject to several attachments by enforcement officers or by enforcement officers 
and bailiffs, jurisdiction for the auction shall be based on the first attachment only.  
(2) Where a creditor conducts the auction, the auction shall be conducted for all creditors involved.  
(3) The proceeds shall be distributed according to the order of the attachments or according to an 
alternative agreement of the creditors involved.  
(4) Where the proceeds are insufficient to cover the receivables, and a creditor for whom the second or a 
later attachment was effected demands, without the agreement of the other creditors involved, 
distribution other than according to the order of the attachments, the local court in whose district the 
attachment is effected shall be notified of the situation and the proceeds deposited. The notification shall 
be accompanied by the documentation relating to the proceedings. Sections 873 to 882 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure shall apply to the procedure for di stribution.  
(5) Where attachments are effected simultaneously for various creditors, the provisions of subsections 
(2) to (4) above shall apply subject to the proviso that the proceeds are distributed in proportion to the 
receivables.  
III. Enforcement agai nst receivables and other property rights  
Section 309  
Attachment of a monetary claim  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 116 of 141 (1) Where a monetary claim is to be attached, the enforcement authority shall issue a written prohibition 
to the third party debtor against making payments to the judgemen t debtor, and shall order the 
judgement debtor in writing to refrain from every disposition over the receivable, especially the 
sequestration of the receivable (attachment order). This may not be done in electronic form.  
(2) The attachment shall be effecte d where the attachment order is served on the third party debtor. The 
attachment order to be served on the third party debtor should describe the monetary amount to be 
recovered only by providing a figure without stating the types of tax and the periods fo r which it is owed. 
The debtor shall be informed of service.  
(3) In the case of the attachment of a credit balance on the judgement debtor’s account at a credit 
institution, sections 833a and 850l of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply accordingly. Sec tion 850l of 
the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply subject to the proviso that applications are to be submitted to the 
competent court of enforcement pursuant to section 828(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure.  
Section 310  
Attachment of a receivable secure d by a mortgage  
(1) In order to attach a receivable for which a mortgage exists, the mortgage certificate shall be handed 
over to the enforcement authority in addition to the attachment order. Surrender shall be deemed to have 
been effected when the enforc ement officer removes the certificate. Where the mortgage certificate 
cannot be issued, the attachment shall be entered in the Land  Register; the entry shall, by reason of the 
attachment order, be made at the request of the enforcement authority.  
(2) Where  the attachment order is served on the third party debtor prior to surrender of the mortgage 
certificate or entry of the attachment, the attachment shall be regarded as being effected against the 
third party debtor upon service.  
(3) These provisions shall not apply insofar as claims to ancillary payments described in section 1159 of 
the Civil Code are being attached. The same shall apply for a debt -securing mortgage in the case of 
section 1187 of the Civil Code to the attachment of the main receivable.  
Sect ion 311  
Attachment of a receivable secured by a ship mortgage or registered lien on an aircraft  
(1) The attachment of a receivable for which a ship mortgage exists shall be entered into the ship 
register or ship construction register.  
(2) The attachment of  a receivable for which a registered lien on an aircraft exists shall be entered into 
the register for liens on aircraft.  
(3) The attachment pursuant to subsections (1) and (2) above shall, by reason of the attachment order, 
be entered at the request of th e enforcement authority. Section 310(2) shall apply accordingly.  
(4) Subsections (1) to (3) above shall not apply insofar as the attachment of claims for payments 
described in section 53 of the Act on Rights in Registered Ships and Ships under Construction  and 
section 53 of the Act Governing Rights in Aircraft are involved. The same shall apply where, in the case 
of a ship mortgage, the main receivable is attached for a receivable from a debenture to the bearer, from 
a bill of exchange or on another instrum ent transferred by endorsement.  
(5) Section 106(1), number 3, and 106(5) of the Act Governing Rights in Aircraft shall apply to the 
attachment of receivables for which a right in a foreign aircraft exists.  
Section 312  
Attachment of a receivable from endors able instruments  
Receivables from bills of exchange and other instruments which can be transferred by endorsement 
shall be attached by the enforcement officer taking possession of them.  
Section 313  
Attachment of regular earnings  
(1) A lien which is acquir ed through the attachment of a salary claim or the attachment of a similar 
existent receivable against regular earnings shall also extend to amounts that fall due at a later point in 
time.  
(2) The attachment of an official salary shall also cover the incom e which the judgement debtor draws 
when moved to another post, when awarded a new post or in the case of salary increase. This shall not 
apply in the case of a change of employer.  
(3) Where the employment relationship ends and the judgement debtor and thir d party debtor establish 
such a relationship anew within nine months, the attachment shall extend to the receivable arising from 
the new employment relationship.  
Section 314  
Sequestration order  
(1) The enforcement authority shall order the sequestration of  the attached receivable. Section 309(2) 
shall apply accordingly.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 117 of 141 (2) The sequestration order may be issued in combination with the attachment order.  
(3) Where the order is for the sequestration of an attached account balance, held at a financial 
instituti on, of the judgement debtor who is a natural person, section 835(3), second sentence, and 835(4) 
of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply accordingly.  
(4) Where the order is for the sequestration of attached non -recurring remuneration of a judgement 
debtor who is a natural person for personally rendered work or services or other income which is not 
wages, section 835(5) of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply accordingly.  
Section 315  
Effect of the sequestration order  
(1) The sequestration order shall r eplace the judgement debtor’s formal declarations upon which, under 
civil law, the entitlement to sequester depends. It shall also suffice in the case of a receivable for which a 
mortgage, ship mortgage, or a registered lien on an aircraft exists. To the b enefit of a third party debtor, 
a sequestration order unjustly issued shall be considered legal vis -à-vis the judgement debtor until the 
order is cancelled and the third party debtor is informed hereof.  
(2) The judgement debtor shall be obliged to provide the information required to enforce the receivable 
and to release the available documents regarding the receivable. Where the judgement debtor fails to 
provide information, he shall be obliged at the enforcement authority’s request to have this information  
recorded and to make a sworn statement about the information he has provided. The enforcement 
authority may amend the sworn statement of assets according to the situation. Section 284(5), (6), and 
(8) shall apply accordingly. The enforcement authority may  have the documents removed by the 
enforcement officer or force their return pursuant to sections 328 to 335.  
(3) Where it is not possible to locate the documents, the judgement debtor shall, upon request by the 
enforcement authority, make a sworn statemen t, to be recorded in writing, that he is not in possession of 
the documents nor does he know where these documents are. Subsection (2), third and fourth 
sentences, above shall apply accordingly.  
(4) Where a third party is in possession of the document, the  enforcement authority may also assert the 
judgement debtor’s claim for return.  
Section 316  
Third party debtor’s obligation to submit a declaration  
(1) At the request of the enforcement authority, the third party debtor shall declare the following to the 
authority within two weeks, calculated from service of the attachment order:  
1. whether and to what extent he recognises the receivable as justified and is prepared to pay,  
2. whether other persons have claims against the receivable and what these claims ar e, 
3. whether the receivable has already been attached for other creditors, and on account of 
which claims,  
4. whether, with regard to the account of which the credit balance has been attached, the 
exemption of the credit balance from attachment has been o rdered pursuant to section 850l of the 
Code of Civil Procedure within the last twelve months, and  
5. whether the account of which the credit balance has been attached is an account with 
protection from attachment within the meaning of section 850k(7) of th e Code of Civil Procedure.  
The third party debtor’s declaration regarding number 1 above shall not be considered an 
acknowledgement of debt.  
(2) The request to submit this declaration may be included in the attachment order. The third party 
debtor shall be  liable to the enforcement authority for the damage incurred from the failure to fulfil his 
obligation. The third party debtor may be enjoined to submit the declaration through a coercive fine; 
section 334 shall not apply.  
(3) Sections 841 to 843 of the Co de of Civil Procedure shall apply.  
Section 317  
Other form of realisation  
Where the attached receivable is conditional or aged or the sequestration thereof difficult, the 
enforcement authority may order that it be realised by other means; section 315(1) sha ll apply 
accordingly. The judgement debtor must be consulted beforehand insofar as an announcement outside 
the territory of application of the law or a public announcement is not required.  
Section 318  
Claims for the return or transfer of items  
(1) Apart fr om sections 309 to 317, the provisions below shall apply to the enforcement against claims 
for the return or transfer of items.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 118 of 141 (2) When attaching a claim concerning a moveable item, the enforcement authority shall order that the 
item be returned to the en forcement officer. The item shall be disposed of in the same way as an 
attached item.  
(3) When attaching a claim concerning rights to an immovable item, the enforcement authority shall 
order that the item be returned to a trustee which the local court lex rei sitae  appoints upon application 
by the enforcement authority. Where the claim is directed towards the transfer of ownership, the item 
shall be conveyed to the trustee as representative of the judgement debtor. Upon transfer of ownership 
to the judgemen t debtor, the body to which the enforcement authority belongs shall obtain a debt -
securing mortgage for the receivable. The trustee shall approve the registration of the debt -securing 
mortgage. Enforcement against the item returned shall, according to the provisions on enforcement, be 
effected against the rights to an immovable item.  
(4) Subsection (3) above shall apply accordingly where the claim concerns a ship registered in the ship 
register, a ship under construction or floating dock registered in the s hip register or that may be 
registered in this register, or an aircraft registered in the aircraft register or, following deletion in the 
aircraft register, is still registered in the register for liens on aircraft.  
(5) The trustee shall be granted compens ation upon application. The compensation may not exceed the 
remuneration to be set according to the Ordinance on Official Receivers.  
Section 319  
Exemption of receivables from attachment  
Prohibitions and restrictions under sections 850 to 852 of the Code of  Civil Procedure as well as other 
legal provisions on the attachment of receivables and claims shall apply mutatis mutandis . 
Section 320  
Multiple attachment of a receivable  
(1) Where a receivable is attached by multiple enforcement authorities or by an enf orcement authority 
and a court, sections 853 to 856 of the Code of Civil Procedure and section 99(1), first sentence, of the 
Act Governing Rights in Aircraft shall apply accordingly.  
(2) Where there is no local court with jurisdiction pursuant to sections 853 and 854 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, deposit shall be lodged with the local court in whose district the enforcement authority to first 
have its attachment order served on the third party debtor is located.  
Section 321  
Enforcement against other prope rty rights  
(1) The above provisions shall apply accordingly to enforcement against other property rights which are 
not the subject of enforcement against immovable assets.  
(2) Where there is no third party debtor, attachment shall be effected where the ord er to refrain from 
every disposition over the right is served on the judgement debtor.  
(3) An inalienable right, unless otherwise stipulated, shall be attachable to the extent that the exercise of 
the right may be entrusted to another person.  
(4) The enfor cement authority may, in the case of enforcement against inalienable rights, the exercise of 
which may be entrusted to another person, issue special orders and, in the case of enforcement against 
usufructs in particular, order administration; in this case,  attachment shall be effected by surrendering 
the item to be used to the administrator insofar as it has not already been effected through service of the 
attachment order.  
(5) Where disposal of the right is permissible, the enforcement authority may order the disposal.  
(6) The provisions on enforcement against a receivable for which a mortgage exists shall apply to 
enforcement against Land  charges or an annuity charge.  
(7) Sections 858 to 863 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply mutatis mutandis . 
4th Subchapter  
Enforcement against immovable assets  
Section 322  
Procedure  
(1) Apart from real properties, enforcement against immovable assets shall also apply to the entitlements 
for which the provisions relating to real properties apply, to the ships regist ered in the ship register, to the 
ships under construction and floating docks registered in the ship register or which can be registered in 
this register, as well as to aircraft registered in the aircraft register or, following deletion in the aircraft 
register, are still registered in the register for liens on aircraft. The provisions in force for compulsory 
judicial execution, namely sections 864 to 871 of the Code of Civil Procedure and the Act on Compulsory 
Sale by Public Auction and Compulsory Receiver ship, shall apply with respect to the enforcement. In the 
case of deferral or suspension of implementation, a debt -securing mortgage registered by means of 
enforcement shall however only then pass to the owner pursuant to section 868 of the Code of Civil Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 119 of 141 Procedure, and a ship’s mortgage or a registered lien on an aircraft shall however only then expire 
pursuant to section 870a(3) of the Code of Civil Procedure as well as section 99(1) of the Act Governing 
Rights in Aircraft, where the cancellation of enforc ement measures is ordered at the same time.  
(2) Section 171 of the Act on Compulsory Sale by Public Auction and Compulsory Receivership shall 
apply to enforcement against foreign ships; section 106(1) and (2) of the Act Governing Rights in Aircraft 
as well  as sections 171h to 171n of the Act on Compulsory Sale by Public Auction and Compulsory 
Receivership shall apply to enforcement against foreign aircraft.  
(3) The enforcement authority shall submit the creditor’s applications necessary for enforcement agai nst 
the immovable assets. The enforcement authorities shall confirm in the process that the legal 
prerequisites for enforcement exist. These matters shall not be subject to the judgement of the 
enforcement court or the Land  registry office. Applications to  register a debt -securing mortgage, a ship’s 
mortgage or a registered lien on an aircraft shall be requests within the meaning of section 38 of the 
Land  Register Code and section 45 of the Code of the Register of Ships.  
(4) The enforcement authority should  only apply for compulsory sale by public auction or compulsory 
receivership where it is determined that the monetary amount cannot be recovered through enforcement 
against the movable assets.  
(5) Insofar as the claim to be enforced, in accordance with 10( 1) number 3 of the Act on Compulsory 
Sale by Public Auction and Compulsory Receivership, takes priority over the rights to the real property, a 
debt-securing mortgage may be registered in the Land  Register under the condition precedent that the 
preferentia l right ceases.  
Section 323  
Enforcement against the legal successor  
Where a debt -securing mortgage, a ship’s mortgage or a registered lien on an aircraft has been 
registered pursuant to section 322, a notice of compulsory tolerance shall only then be requi red for the 
purposes of a compulsory sale by public auction on the basis of this right if, following registration of this 
right, there has been a change of ownership. The first sentence shall apply mutatis mutandis  to the 
compulsory receivership of a debt -securing mortgage registered pursuant to section 322.  
5th Subchapter  
Freezing injunction/arrest of the debtor  
Section 324  
Freezing injunction  
(1) To safeguard the enforcement of monetary claims pursuant to sections 249 to 323, the revenue 
authority respons ible for assessing tax may order movable or immovable assets to be frozen where 
there are reasons to fear that recovery will otherwise be thwarted or seriously hindered. The authorities 
may also order a freezing injunction where the receivable has not yet been determined in monetary 
terms or when it is provisory or aged. The freezing injunction order shall state a monetary amount, the 
deposit of which will have the effect of suspending the freezing injunction and cancelling any freezing 
injunction carried o ut. 
(2) The freezing injunction order shall be served. It shall state its reasons and be signed by the ordering 
official. This may not be done in electronic form.  
(3) The implementation of the freezing injunction order shall be impermissible where one mont h has 
passed since the date on which it was signed. Implementation shall also be permissible prior to the 
service on the debtor subject to the freezing injunction, however, it shall have no effect where the order 
is not served within one week of implementa tion and within one month of signature. Section 169(1), third 
sentence, shall apply accordingly in the case of service abroad and of public notification. Sections 930 to 
932 of the Code of Civil Procedure as well as section 99(2) and section 106(1), 106(3)  and 106(5) of the 
Act Governing Rights in Aircraft shall apply accordingly to the implementation of the freezing injunction; 
the enforcement authority shall take the place of the court ordering the freezing injunction and the court 
of enforcement, the enf orcement officer shall take the place of the bailiff. Insofar as reference is made to 
the provisions on attachment, the corresponding provisions of this Code shall apply.  
Section 325  
Cancellation of the freezing injunction  
The freezing injunction order sha ll be cancelled where, after it has been issued, circumstances come to 
light suggesting that the freezing injunction order may no longer be justified.  
Section 326  
Arrest of the debtor  
(1) Upon application by the revenue authority responsible for the tax as sessment, the local court may 
order the arrest of the debtor where this is necessary to secure enforcement against the assets of the Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 120 of 141 liable party. The local court in whose district the revenue authority has its seat or where the liable party is 
located sha ll be responsible.  
(2) The revenue authority responsible for the tax assessment shall state in the application the nature and 
amount of the claim as well as the facts leading to the arrest.  
(3) Sections 128(4) and sections 922 to 925, 927, 929, 933, 934(1) , (3), and (4) of the Code of Civil 
Procedure shall apply mutatis mutandis  to the order, implementation and cancellation of the arrest. 
Section 802j(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure shall not apply.  
(4) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply to service of the order.  
6th Subchapter  
Realisation of collateral  
Section 327  
Realisation of collateral  
Where monetary claims enforceable through administrative proceedings (section 251) are not met at 
maturity, the enforcement authority may satisfy the claims from the collateral it has obtained to 
guarantee these claims. The collateral shall be realised according to the provisions of this chapter. 
Collateral may only then be realised where the judgement debtor has been informed of the intention of 
realising the collateral and at least one week has passed since this has been disclosed.  
Third Chapter  
Enforcement other than of monetary claims  
1st Subchapter  
Enforcement owing to actions, tolerance or omissions  
Section 328  
Coercive measures  
(1) An adminis trative act that is directed at the performance of an action or at the tolerance or omission 
of an action may be enforced using coercive measures (coercive fine, substitutive execution, direct 
enforcement). Section 336 shall apply to forcing the provision of collateral. The authority issuing the 
administrative act shall be the enforcement authority.  
(2) The coercive measure least detrimental to the liable party and to the public shall be determined. The 
coercive measure shall be proportionate to its purpose .  
Section 329  
Coercive fine  
No individual coercive fine may exceed 25,000 euros.  
Section 330  
Substitutive execution  
Where the obligation to perform an action which may be undertaken by another party is not fulfilled, the 
enforcement authority may commissi on another party to undertake the action at the liable party’s 
expense.  
Section 331  
Direct enforcement  
Where the coercive fine or substitutive execution do not attain the objective or where they are not 
appropriate, the revenue authority may force the liab le party to perform, tolerate or omit to do an action, 
or to perform the action itself.  
Section 332  
Giving warning of coercive measures  
(1) Warning of the coercive measure shall be issued in writing. Where there are grounds to fear that, in 
so doing, the f orced implementation of the administrative act to be implemented will be thwarted, it shall 
be sufficient to issue an oral warning of the coercive measure or issue a warning by other necessary 
means conducive to the situation. An appropriate deadline shall  be set for the discharge of the 
obligation.  
(2) The warning may be issued in combination with the administrative act instructing the performance, 
tolerance or omission of an action. The warning shall refer to a particular coercive measure and shall be 
issued separately for each obligation. Warning shall be given of the specific amount of the coercive fine.  
(3) A renewed warning for the same obligation shall be permissible only then where the coercive 
measure first threatened is unsuccessful. Where the liab le party is required to tolerate or omit to do an 
act, it shall be permissible to give warning of a coercive measure for each instance of an offence.  
(4) Where the performance of an action is to be conducted by substitutive execution, the warning shall 
contain a provisional estimate of the amount of the cost.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 121 of 141 Section 333  
Determining the coercive measures  
Where the obligation is not fulfilled within the deadline set out in the warning or the liable party acts in 
breach of the obligation, the revenue authorit y shall determine the coercive measure.  
Section 334  
Substitutive coercive detention  
(1) Where a stipulated coercive fine cannot be recovered from a natural person, the local court may, 
upon application by the revenue authority, order substitute coercive de tention after consulting the liable 
party if reference had been made to this in warning of the coercive fine. Where the local court orders 
substitutive coercive detention, the court shall issue an arrest warrant in which the applying authority, 
liable part y and the reason for the arrest shall be stated.  
(2) The local court shall rule by way of decision, exercising due discretion. The local court in whose 
district the liable party is resident or, in the absence of a residence, has his habitual abode, shall h ave 
local jurisdiction. The decision of the local court shall be subject to the appeal procedure pursuant to 
sections 567 to 577 of the Code of Civil Procedure.  
(3) Substitutive coercive detention shall be for a minimum of one day and a maximum of two week s. The 
implementation of the substitutive coercive detention shall be determined pursuant to sections 904 to 
906, 909 and 910 of the Code of Civil Procedure and sections 171 to 175 of the Prison Act.  
(4) Where the claim to the coercive fine becomes time -barred, the detention may no longer be enforced.  
Section 335  
Termination of the coercive procedure  
Where the obligation is fulfilled following determination of the coercive measure, enforcement shall be 
stayed.  
2nd Subchapter  
Forcing provision of collateral  
Section 336  
Forcing provision of collateral  
(1) Where the obligation to provide collateral is not fulfilled, the revenue authority may attach eligible 
collateral.  
(2) The act of forcing provision of collateral shall be preceded by a written warning. Sectio ns 262 to 323 
shall apply accordingly.  
Fourth Chapter  
Costs  
Section 337  
Costs of enforcement  
(1) Costs (fees and expenses) shall be levied during the enforcement proceedings. The judgement 
debtor shall be liable for these costs.  
(2) No costs shall be levie d for the order for payment procedure.  
Section 338  
Types of fees  
Fees for attachment (section 339), confiscation (section 340) and realisation (section 341) shall be levied 
as part of the enforcement proceedings.  
Section 339  
Attachment fee  
(1) An attachmen t fee shall be levied for the attachment of movable items, for animals, for crops not yet 
separated from the ground, for receivables and for other property rights.  
(2) The fee shall be incurred:  
1. as soon as the enforcement officer has undertaken steps to  carry out the enforcement 
order,  
2. upon service of the order through which a receivable or another property right is to be 
attached.  
(3) The fee shall be 26 euros.  
(4) The fee shall also be levied where  
1. attachment is averted by payment to the enforcem ent officer,  
2. payment is made by some other means after the enforcement officer has been in situ,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 122 of 141 3. an attempt at attachment has not led to the desired result because no attachable objects 
were uncovered, or  
4. attachment in the cases of section 281(3) of this Code as well as sections 812 and 851b(1) 
of the Code of Civil Procedure does not occur.  
Where the attachment is averted by other means, no fee shall be levied.  
Sectio n 340  
Confiscation fee  
(1) A confiscation fee shall be charged for the confiscatio n of movable items including documents in the 
cases of sections 310, 315(2), fifth sentence, sections 318, 321, 331 and 336. This shall also apply 
where the judgement debtor voluntarily pays the enforcement officer present to undertake the 
enforcement.  
(2) Section 339(2) number 1 shall apply accordingly.  
(3) The amount of the confiscation fee shall be 26 euros. The fee shall also be levied where the items 
described in subsection (1) above cannot be uncovered.  
Section 341  
Realisation fee  
(1) A realisation fe e shall be levied for auction by public sale and realisation by other means of objects.  
(2) The fee shall be incurred as soon as the enforcement officer or another agent has undertaken steps 
to carry out the enforcement order.  
(3) The fee shall be 52 euros . 
(4) Where realisation is averted (section 296(1), fourth sentence), a fee of 26 euros shall be levied.  
Section 342  
Plurality of debtors  
(1) Where enforcement is undertaken against several debtors, the fees shall be levied on each 
judgement debtor, even w here the enforcement officer performs several acts of enforcement on the 
same occasion.  
(2) Where enforcement is undertaken against joint and several debtors for a joint debt on the same 
occasion, the fees for attachment, confiscation and realisation shall  only be levied once. The persons 
described in the first sentence above shall be liable for the fees as joint and several debtors.  
Section 343  
(rescinded)  
Section 34 4 
Expenses  
(1) The following shall be charged as expenses:  
1. clerical expenses for copies  that are to be issued, or that are sent via fax, in a non -official 
capacity; irres pective of how such copies are produced, the amount of such clerical expenses shall 
be 
a) 0.50 euros per page for the first 50 pages,  
b) 0.15 euros for each additional page,  
c) 1.00 euro per page for the first 50 pages copied in colour,  
d) 0.30 euros for each additional page copied in colour.  
Where electronically stored files are supplied in place of copies, expenses shall be 1.50 euros per file. 
A total of no more than 5 eur os shall be charged for electronic documents supplied in one working 
step or for documents transferred to a data storage device in one working step. If, upon advance 
request, documents are converted from printed form to electronic form for the purpose of s upplying 
electronically stored data, the fee for clerical expenses under the second sentence above shall not be 
less than the fee that would have been charged if the first sentence above were to have applied.  
2. fees for postal and telecommunication servic es excluding fees for local area telephone 
services,  
3. fees for service by the postal service with notice of receipt; where service is undertaken by 
the authority (section 5 of the Administrative Service of Documents Act), a fee of 7.50 euros shall be 
charged,  
4. costs incurred through public notification,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 123 of 141 5. the amounts to be paid to persons called upon to open doors and containers as well as to 
those called upon to search the judgement debtors,  
6. costs for the movement, storage and supervision of attach ed items, costs of harvesting 
attached crops and costs for the storage, feeding, care and movement of attached animals,  
7. amounts that, in corresponding application of the Judicial Remuneration and Compensation 
Act, are to be paid to court experts (sectio n 107) as well as amounts to be paid to the trustees 
(section 318(5)),  
7a. costs charged by a credit institution because a judgement debtor’s cheque was not cashed,  
7b. costs for transferring a registered security or for the reinstatement of a bearer instr ument,  
8. other amounts to be paid to third parties because of enforcement measures, especially 
amounts paid to agents and aides during substitutive execution or in the case of direct enforcement, 
and other costs incurred by carrying out direct enforcement  or applying substitutive coercive 
detention.  
(2) Taxes which the revenue authority owes because of enforcement measures shall be levied as 
expenses.  
(3) Where items or animals which have been attached in the case of several judgement debtors are 
collected  and realised in a single procedure, the expenses arising in this procedure shall be divided 
between the judgement debtors involved. The special circumstances involved in individual cases, above 
all the value, amount and weight of the objects, shall be tak en into account in the process.  
Section 345  
Travel expenses and expense allowances  
In the enforcement proceedings, the judgement debtor shall not be required to refund the enforcement 
officer’s travel expenses and the expenses which can be reimbursed throu gh expense allowances.  
Section 346  
Incorrect treatment of items, period for assessment  
(1) Costs which would not have been incurred were items treated correctly shall not be levied.  
(2) The period for the calculation of the costs and for the cancellation o r amendment of the calculation of 
the costs shall be one year. It shall begin upon expiration of the calendar year in which the costs arose. 
An application for cancellation or amendment filed before the expiration of the period may also be met 
after the pe riod has expired.  
Seventh Part  
Out-of-court proceedings for legal remedy  
First Chapter  
Permissibility  
Section 347  
Permissibility of objections  
(1) Objection to administrative acts  
1. in fiscal matters to which this Code applies,  
2. in procedures to enforce  administrative acts in matters other than those described under 
number 1 above, insofar as the administrative acts are to be enforced by revenue authorities of the 
Federation or Land  revenue authorities pursuant to the provisions of this Code,  
3. in publi c law and occupational law matters to which this Code applies pursuant to section 
164a of the Tax Consultancy Act,  
4. in other matters administered by the revenue authorities, insofar as the provisions on out -of-
court legal remedies have been or are declar ed applicable by law,  
shall be permissible as a means of legal remedy. In addition, an objection shall be permissible where it is 
asserted that in the matters described in the first sentence above no ruling has been made on an 
application by the appellant  for the issue of an administrative act without notification of a sufficient 
reason within an appropriate time limit.  
(2) “Fiscal matters” shall mean all matters connected to the administration of taxes including tax refunds 
or matters otherwise connected with the application of tax and excise provisions by the revenue 
authorities, including measures of the revenue authorities of the Federation to ensure adherence to Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 124 of 141 prohibitions and restrictions in respect of the cross -border flow of goods; matters concern ing the 
administration of fiscal monopolies shall be deemed equal to fiscal matters.  
(3) The regulations of the Seventh Part shall not apply to criminal and administrative fine proceedings.  
Section 348  
Impermissibility of objections  
It shall not be permiss ible to object  
1. to objection rulings (section 367),  
2. to failure to rule on the objection,  
3. to administrative acts of the highest revenue authorities of the Federation and the Länder , 
except for acts that provide for objection proceedings,  
4. to rulin gs in matters contained in the second and sixth chapter of the second part of the Tax 
Consulting Act,  
5. (rescinded)  
6. in the cases described in section 172(3).  
Section 349  
(rescinded)  
Section 350  
Gravamen  
Only the party asserting to have been aggrieved b y an administrative act or the omission thereof shall be 
authorised to lodge an objection.  
Section 351  
Binding effect of other administrative acts  
(1) Unless the provisions on the cancellation or amendment of administrative acts provide otherwise, 
administ rative acts amending incontestable administrative acts may be challenged only to the extent that 
the amendment suffices.  
(2) Rulings on a basic assessment notice (section 171(10)) may be challenged only by contesting this 
notice and not by contesting the f ollow -up notice.  
Section 352  
Authority to object in the case of joint determination  
(1) The following may lodge an objection against notices on the joint and separate determination of tax 
bases:  
1. managing directors appointed as representatives or, where such are not available, the 
agent authorised to object within the meaning of subsection (2) below,  
2. where persons in number 1 above are not available, every partner, co -owners or persons 
jointly entitled against whom a notice of determination has been is sued or would have to be issued,  
3. even where persons in number 1 above are available, former partners, co -owners or 
persons jointly entitled against whom a notice of determination has been issued or would have to be 
issued,  
4. insofar as it involves the question of who has a holding in the amount determined and how 
this amount is divided between the individual participants involved, everyone who is affected by the 
corresponding findings,  
5. insofar as it involves a matter of personal concern to a particip ant, everyone who is affected 
by the corresponding findings.  
(2) The person authorised to object within the meaning of subsection (1) number 1 above shall be the 
common authorised recipient within the meaning of section 183(1), first sentence, or section 6 (1), first 
sentence, of the Ordinance of 19 December 1986 on the separate determination of tax bases pursuant 
to section 180(2) of the Fiscal Code (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 2663). Where the persons involved in the 
determination have not appointed a common  authorised recipient, the person authorised to object within 
the meaning of subsection (1) number 1 above shall be the nominal authorised recipient pursuant to 
section 183(1), second sentence, or the authorised recipient appointed by the revenue authority  
pursuant to section 183(1), third to fifth sentences, or pursuant to section 6(1), third to fifth sentences, of 
the Ordinance on the separate determination of tax bases pursuant to section 180(2) of the Fiscal Code; Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 125 of 141 this shall not apply to persons involve d in the determination who raise an objection with the revenue 
authority against the authorised recipient’s authority to object. The first and second sentences above 
shall only apply where the participants in the determination declaration or in the call fo r the appointment 
of an authorised recipient have been instructed of the authorised recipient’s authority to object.  
Section 353  
Legal successor’s authority to object  
Where a notice of determination, a notice assessing the base amount of real property tax or an 
apportionment and allocation notice with respect to a base amount of real property tax has an impact on 
the legal successor without his having been informed of this (section 182(2), section 184(1), fourth 
sentence, sections 185 and 190), the legal su ccessor may lodge an objection only within the relevant 
period for objection applicable to the legal predecessor.  
Section 354  
Waiver of objection  
(1) The submission of an objection may be waived following issue of the administrative act. The waiver 
may als o be made when submitting a self -assessed tax return in the event that the tax assessed does 
not deviate from that in the self -assessed tax return. The waiver shall render objection impermissible.  
(1a) Insofar as bases for taxation may be of significance f or a mutual agreement procedure or arbitration 
pursuant to an agreement within the meaning of section 2, entitlement to lodge an objection may be 
waived. The tax base to which the waiver applies shall be described precisely.  
(2) The waiver shall be made to  the revenue authority responsible in writing or declared for record; it may 
not contain any further declarations. Where the invalidity of the waiver is subsequently asserted, section 
110(3) shall apply mutatis mutandis . 
Second Chapter  
Procedural rules  
Section 355  
Period for objection  
(1) Objection pursuant to section 347(1), first sentence, shall be lodged within one month of notice of the 
administrative act. An objection against a self -assessed tax return shall be lodged within one month of 
the revenue au thority receiving the self -assessed tax return, in the cases of section 168, second 
sentence, within one month of disclosure of the agreement.  
(2) No time period shall apply to the objection pursuant to section 347(1), second sentence.  
Section 356  
Instruct ions on applicable legal remedies  
(1) Where an administrative act is issued in writing or in electronic form, the time period for lodging an 
objection shall begin only if the participant has been instructed, in line with the manner used for that act, 
abou t the possibility to object, the revenue authority where such an objection must be lodged, the 
location of the revenue authority, and the deadline for lodging an objection.  
(2) Where such instructions have not been given or have been given incorrectly, the  lodging of an 
objection shall be permissible only within one year following disclosure of the administrative act, unless 
lodging an objection before such one -year period expires is not possible due to force majeure  or unless 
instructions are provided in w riting or electronically that it is not possible to lodge an objection. Section 
110(2) shall apply mutatis mutandis  for the instance of force majeure . 
Section 357  
Submission of the objection  
(1) The objection shall be submitted in written or electronic for m or lodged orally. For the purpose of 
identifying the appellant, it shall suffice for the appellant to be indicated in the objection. The objection 
shall not be adversely affected if it is designated incorrectly.  
(2) The objection shall be lodged with th e authority whose administrative act is being disputed or to 
which an application for an administrative act was submitted. An objection against the determination of 
tax bases or against the assessment of a base amount of non -personal tax may also be entere d with the 
authority responsible for issuing the tax assessment notice. An objection directed against an 
administrative act that an authority issued for the responsible revenue authority on the basis of a legal 
provision may also be lodged with the respons ible revenue authority. Lodging a written or electronic 
objection with another authority shall have no adverse effects if the objection is transmitted, prior to the 
deadline for objection, to one of the authorities where an objection may be lodged in accor dance with the 
first to third sentences above.  
(3) The administrative act against which the objection is directed should be stated when submitting the 
objection. The extent to which an administrative act is being challenged and its cancellation applied for  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 126 of 141 should be indicated. Furthermore, both the facts justifying the objection and the evidence should be 
cited.  
Section 358  
Verification of the requirements for permissibility  
The revenue authority appointed to rule on the objection shall verify whether the o bjection is permissible 
and, in particular, has been submitted in the prescribed form and within the prescribed deadline. Where 
any one of these requirements is not meet, the objection shall be rejected as impermissible.  
Section 359  
Participants  
The partic ipants in the proceedings shall be:  
1. whoever has submitted the objection (appellant),  
2. whoever has been enlisted in the proceedings.  
Section 360  
Enlistment of others in the proceedings  
(1) The revenue authority appointed to rule on the objection may en list other persons, ex officio or upon 
application, whose legal interests, pursuant to the tax laws, will be affected by the ruling, including, in 
particular, those who, pursuant to the tax laws, are also liable in addition to the taxpayer. Prior to the 
enlistment of others, the person who submitted the objection shall be consulted.  
(2) Where a fiscal charge is administered for another entity entitled to the fiscal charge, this entity may 
not be enlisted merely because its interests, as the entity entitled to the fiscal charge, will be affected by 
the ruling.  
(3) Where third parties are involved in the contentious legal relationship in such a way that a ruling can 
only be taken in a uniform manner in relation to them as well, they shall be enlisted in the pr oceedings. 
This shall not apply for persons jointly entitled who, pursuant to section 352, are not authorised to submit 
an objection.  
(4) Whoever is enlisted in the proceedings may assert the same rights as the person who has submitted 
the objection.  
(5) W here pursuant to subsection (3) above more than 50 persons are candidates for enlistment, the 
revenue authority may decree that only those persons who apply for enlistment within a particular period 
shall be enlisted. Individual notification of the decree may be waived where the decree is published in the 
Federal Gazette and is furthermore published in the daily newspapers which are disseminated in the 
area in which the ruling is likely to have an effect. The deadline shall be at least three months from the  
date of publication in the Federal Gazette. The publication in the daily newspapers shall state the date 
upon which the deadline expires. Section 110 shall apply accordingly with respect to restitutio in 
integrum where a time limit has not been complied w ith. The revenue authority should enlist persons 
who will be evidently affected to a particular degree by the ruling including, even without an application 
being made for such.  
Section 361  
Suspension of implementation  
(1) Subject to the provisions of subse ction (4) below, the submission of an objection shall not have the 
effect of blocking implementation of the disputed administrative act, especially where the levy of a fiscal 
charge is concerned. The same shall apply when contesting basic assessment notice s for the follow -up 
notices based thereon.  
(2) The revenue authority which issued the disputed administrative act may suspend implementation in 
whole or in part; section 367(1), second sentence, shall apply mutatis mutandis . Upon application, 
suspension sh ould be granted where serious doubts exist as to the legality of the administrative act 
being disputed or where implementation would result for the person affected in unreasonable hardship 
not required by overriding public interests. Where the administrati ve act has already been implemented, 
the suspension of implementation shall be replaced by the cancellation of the implementation. In the 
case of tax assessment notices, the suspension and the cancellation of implementation shall be limited 
to the assessed  tax minus the  withheld taxes to be credited, the corporation tax to be credited and the 
assessed prepayments; this shall not apply where the suspension or the cancellation of implementation 
appears to be necessary in order to prevent substantial disadvant ages. Suspension may be made 
dependent upon provision of collateral.  
(3) Insofar as the implementation of a basic assessment notice is suspended, the implementation of a 
follow -up notice shall also be suspended. The issue of a follow -up notice shall remain  permissible. In the 
case of the suspension of a follow -up notice, a ruling shall be made on the provision of collateral, unless 
the provision of collateral was specifically excluded when suspending the implementation of the basic 
assessment notice.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 127 of 141 (4) Th e submission of an objection against the prohibition of the operation of a trade or business or the 
exercise of an occupation or profession shall have the effect of blocking implementation of the disputed 
administrative act. The revenue authority which iss ued the administrative act may eliminate the blocking 
effect in whole or in part by specific order where the revenue authority deems this necessary in the 
public interest; the revenue authority shall substantiate the argument for the public interest in wri ting. 
Section 367(1), second sentence, shall apply mutatis mutandis . 
(5) Rejection of the suspension of the implementation may only be referred to the court pursuant to 
section 69(3) and (5), third sentence, of Code of Procedure for Fiscal Courts.  
Section 362 
Withdrawal of the objection  
(1) An objection may be withdrawn up until the point at which notification is given of the ruling. Section 
357(1) and (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis . 
(1a) Insofar as tax bases may be of significance for a mutual agreement procedure or arbitration 
pursuant to an agreement within the meaning of section 2, the objection against this may be withdrawn 
subject to limitations. Section 354(1a), second sentence, shall apply accordingly.  
(2) The withdrawal shall result in the forfeit ure of the objection submitted. Where the invalidity of the 
withdrawal is subsequently asserted, section 110(3) shall apply mutatis mutandis . 
Section 363  
Suspending and adjourning the proceedings  
(1) Where the ruling depends in whole or in part on the exis tence or non -existence of a legal relationship 
which is the object of a pending legal dispute or which must be determined by a court or an 
administrative authority, the revenue authority may suspend the ruling until the other legal dispute is 
resolved or u ntil the court or administrative authority has ruled.  
(2) The revenue authority may, with the consent of the appellant, adjourn the proceedings where this 
appears appropriate on important grounds. Where proceedings are pending at the Court of Justice of th e 
European Union, the Federal Constitutional Court or a highest federal court with respect to the 
constitutionality of a legal norm or to a legal question, and where the objection is based upon this, the 
objection proceedings shall be adjourned to this ext ent; this shall not apply if tax has been provisionally 
assessed pursuant to section 165(1), second sentence, number 3 or 4. With the consent of the highest 
revenue authority, it may be decreed, through a general order to be publicly disclosed, for groups of 
similar cases that objection proceedings are also adjourned to this extent in cases other than those 
contained in the first and second sentences above. The objection proceedings shall be resumed upon 
application by the appellant or where the revenue aut hority informs the appellant accordingly.  
(3) Where an application for the suspension or adjournment of proceedings is rejected or the suspension 
or adjournment of proceedings revoked, the unlawfulness of the rejection or revocation may only be 
asserted by  court action against the objection ruling.  
Section 364  
Disclosure of the taxation documents  
The participants shall, insofar as this has not yet occurred, be informed of the taxation documents upon 
application or, where the grounds of the objection give ca use for such, ex officio . 
Section 364a  
Discussion of the current and legal status  
(1) Upon application by the appellant, the revenue authority should discuss the current and legal status 
before issuing an objection ruling. Further participants may be invit ed where the revenue authority 
believes this to be expedient. The revenue authority may invite the appellant and other participants to a 
discussion even in the absence of an application by the appellant.  
(2) The revenue authority may elect not to hold a di scussion with more than ten participants. Where the 
participants appoint a common representative within an appropriate deadline set by the revenue 
authority, the current and legal status should be discussed with him.  
(3) The participants may elect to be re presented by an authorised representative. They may also be 
invited to the discussion in person where the revenue authority believes this to be expedient.  
(4) Attendance may not be forced pursuant to section 328.  
Section 364b  
Determination of deadlines  
(1) The revenue authority may set deadlines for the appellant  
1. to state the facts through the consideration or non -consideration of which he feels 
aggrieved,  
2. to clarify specific matters requiring clarification,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 128 of 141 3. to specify evidence or to present docume nts insofar he is obliged to do this.  
(2) Declarations and evidence provided only after the deadline set pursuant to subsection (1) above has 
expired shall not be taken into consideration. Section 367(2), second sentence, shall remain unaffected. 
Section 1 10 shall apply accordingly where the deadline is exceeded.  
(3) Upon setting the deadline, the appellant shall be instructed of the legal consequences pursuant to 
subsection (2) above.  
Section 365  
Application of procedural rules  
(1) The provisions applying to the issue of the disputed or desired administrative act shall furthermore 
apply mutatis mutandis  to the proceedings regarding the objection.  
(2) In the cases described in section 93(5), 96(7), second sentence, and sections 98 to 100, the 
participants a nd their authorised representatives and advisors (section 80) shall be given the opportunity 
to participate in the taking of evidence.  
(3) Where the contested administrative act is amended or replaced, the new administrative act shall 
become the subject m atter of the objection proceedings. The first sentence above shall apply 
accordingly where  
1. an administrative act is corrected pursuant to section 129, or  
2. an administrative act replaces a disputed, invalid administrative act.  
Section 366  
Form, content  and issuance of the objection ruling  
Objection rulings shall be substantiated, shall contain instructions on applicable legal remedies and shall 
be issued to the participants in written or electronic form.  
Section 367  
Objection ruling  
(1) The revenue auth ority which has issued the administrative act shall take a decision on the objection 
by means of an objection ruling. Where another revenue authority has subsequently become responsible 
for a tax case, this revenue authority shall make the ruling; section 26, second sentence, shall remain 
unaffected.  
(2) The revenue authority ruling on the objection shall re -examine the matter in its entirety. The 
administrative act may also be amended to the detriment of the appellant where he has been instructed 
of the po ssibility of a detrimental ruling stating the reasons and he has been given the opportunity to 
comment on this. An objection ruling shall only be required to the extent that the revenue authority does 
not remedy the objection.  
(2a) The revenue authority ma y rule on parts of the objection in advance where this is expedient. In this 
ruling, the revenue authority shall determine which parts are not to become final and binding.  
(2b) Pending objections which concern a legal issue ruled on by the Court of Justice  of the European 
Union, the Federal Constitutional Court, or the Federal Fiscal Court and which cannot be remedied 
before these courts following the outcome of the proceedings may be rejected by way of a general order. 
The highest revenue authority shall h ave subject -matter jurisdiction over the issue of the general order. 
The general order shall be published in the Federal Tax Gazette and on the website of the Federal 
Ministry of Finance. The general order shall be deemed disclosed on the date following th e issuance of 
the Federal Tax Gazette in which such order is published. Notwithstanding section 47(1) of the Code of 
Procedure for Fiscal Courts, the deadline for court action shall end after the expiry of one year following 
the date of disclosure. Section  63(1) number 1 of the Code of Procedure for Fiscal Courts shall also 
apply insofar as an objection is rejected by a general order pursuant to the first sentence above.  
(3) Where the objection is directed against an administrative act which an authority is sued for the 
revenue authority responsible on the basis of a legal provision, the revenue authority responsible shall 
rule on the objection. The authority acting for the revenue authority responsible shall also be authorised 
to remedy the objection.  
Sectio n 368  
(rescinded)  
Eighth Part  
Provisions relating to crimes and administrative fines, criminal and administrative fine 
proceedings  
First Chapter  
Provisions on crimes  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 129 of 141 Section 369  
Tax crimes  
(1) The following shall be tax crimes (customs crimes):  
1. acts whi ch are punishable under the tax laws,  
2. the illegal import, export or transit of goods,  
3. the forging of revenue stamps or acts preparatory thereto, insofar as the act relates to tax 
stamps,  
4. aiding and abetting a person who has committed an act under numbers 1 to 3 above.  
(2) Tax crimes shall be subject to the general provisions of criminal law unless otherwise provided for by 
the tax laws’ provisions on crime.  
Section 370  
Tax evasion  
(1) A penalty of up to five years’ imprisonment or a monetary fine s hall be imposed on any person who  
1. furnishes the revenue authorities or other authorities with incorrect or incomplete particulars 
concerning matters that are relevant for tax purposes,  
2. fails to inform the revenue authorities of facts that are relevan t for tax purposes when 
obliged to do so, or  
3. fails to use revenue stamps or revenue stamping machines when obliged to do so  
and as a result understates taxes or derives unwarranted tax advantages for himself or for another 
person.  
(2) Attempted perpetr ation shall be punishable.  
(3) In particularly serious cases, a penalty of between six months and ten years’  imprisonment shall be 
imposed. In general, a particularly serious case is one in which the perpetrator  
1. deliberately understates taxes on a large  scale or derives unwarranted tax advantages,  
2. abuses his authority or position as a public official or European public official (section 11(1) 
number 2a of the Criminal Code),  
3. solicits the assistance of a public official or European public official ( section 11(1) number 
2a of the Criminal Code) who abuses his authority or position,  
4. repeatedly understates taxes or derives unwarranted tax advantages by using falsified or 
forged documents, or  
5. as a member of a group formed for the purpose of repeate dly committing acts pursuant to 
subsection (1) above, understates value -added taxes or excise duties or derives unwarranted VAT or 
excise duty advantages.  
6.  uses a third -country company (as defined in section 138(3)) over which he can directly or 
indirec tly exercise controlling or decisive influence alone or jointly with related parties (as defined in 
section 1(2) of the External Tax Relations Act), where such use is for the purpose of concealing facts 
that are relevant for tax purposes and in this way un derstating his taxes or obtaining unwarranted ta x 
benefits on an ongoing basis.  
(4) Taxes shall be deemed to have been understated in particular where they are not assessed at all, in 
full or in time; this shall also apply even where the tax has been asses sed provisionally or assessed 
subject to review or where a self -assessed tax return is deemed to be equal to a tax assessment subject 
to review. Tax advantages shall also include tax rebates; unwarranted tax advantages shall be deemed 
derived to the extent  that these are wrongfully granted or retained. The conditions of the first and second 
sentences above shall also be fulfilled where the tax to which the act relates could have been reduced 
for other reasons or the tax advantage could have been claimed for  other reasons.  
(5) The act may also be committed in relation to goods whose importation, exportation or transit is 
banned.  
(6) Subsections (1) to (5) above shall apply even where the act relates to import or export duties which 
are administered by another  Member State of the European Communities or to which a Member State of 
the European Free Trade Association or a country associated therewith is entitled. The same shall apply 
where the act relates to value -added taxes or harmonised excise duties on goods designated in Article 
3(1) of Council Directive 92/12/EEC of 25 February 1992 (OJ L 76, p. 1) which are administered by 
another Member State of the European Communities.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 130 of 141 (7) Irrespective of the lex loci delicti , the provisions of subsections (1) to (6) abo ve shall also apply to 
acts committed outside the territory of application of this Code.  
Section 370a  
(rescinded)  
Section 371  
Voluntary disclosure of tax evasion  
(1) Whoever, in relation to all tax crimes for a type of tax, fully corrects the incorrect par ticulars submitted 
to the revenue authority, supplements the incomplete particulars submitted to the revenue authority or 
furnishes the revenue authority with the previously omitted particulars shall not be punished pursuant to 
section 370 on account of th ese tax crimes. The information provided must cover all tax crimes for one 
type of tax that have not become time -barred, and at least all tax crimes for one type of tax within the last 
10 calendar years.  
(2) Exemption from punishment shall not apply if,  
1. prior to the correction, supplementation or subsequent furnishing of particulars in 
connection with voluntarily disclosed tax crimes that have not become time -barred,  
a) the person involved in the act, his representative, the beneficiary as referred to in  section 
370(1), or the beneficiary’s representative has been notified of an audit order in accordance 
with section 196, limited to the material and temporal scope of the ordered external audit, or  
b) the person involved in the act or his representative ha s been notified of the initiation of 
criminal proceedings or administrative fine proceedings, or  
c) a public official from the revenue authority has already appeared for the purpose of 
carrying out a tax audit, limited to the material and temporal scope of  the external audit, or  
d) a public official has already appeared for the purpose of investigating a tax crime or tax -
related administrative offence, or  
e) a public official from the revenue authority has already appeared and provided proof of 
identity for  the purpose of conducting a VAT inspection in accordance with section 27b of the 
VAT Act, a wages tax inspection in accordance with section 42g of the Income Tax Act or an 
inspection in accordance with other tax law provisions, or  
2. one of the tax crimes  had already been fully or partially detected at the time of the 
correction, supplementation or subsequent furnishing of particulars and the perpetrator knew this or 
should have expected this upon due consideration of the facts of the case,  
3. the tax unde rstated pursuant to section 370(1) or the unwarranted tax advantage derived by 
someone for himself or for another person exceeds the amount of 25,000 euros per act, or  
4.  a particularly serious case exists as specified in section 370(3), second sentence, numbers 
2 to 6.  
In the event that exemption from punishment is ruled out in accordance with the first sentence, numbers 
1a) and 1c) above, this shall not preclude the submission of a correction in accordance with subsection 
(1) above in connection with tax  crimes for one type of tax that do not fall under the scope of the first 
sentence, numbers 1a) and 1c) above.  
(2a) Insofar as tax evasion has been committed by breaching the obligation to submit a complete and 
accurate provisional VAT return or wages tax return on time, exemption from punishment shall apply, 
notwithstanding subsection (1) and subsection (2), first sentence, number 3 above, if the perpetrator 
corrects the incorrect particulars submitted to the competent revenue authority, supplements the 
incomplete particulars submitted to the competent revenue authority, or furnishes the competent revenue 
authority with the previously omitted particulars. Subsection (2), first sentence, number 2 above shall not 
apply if the act was detected upon the discove ry that a provisional VAT return or wages tax return was 
corrected or submitted late. The first and second sentences above shall not apply to tax returns relating 
to the calendar year. In order for a voluntary disclosure relating to a tax return for a part icular calendar 
year to be deemed complete, it shall not be compulsory to correct, supplement or subsequently furnish 
particulars for provisional returns concerning time periods following that calendar year.  
(3) Where tax has already been understated or ta x advantages have already been derived, exemption 
from punishment shall be granted to the person involved in the act only if he pays, within the reasonable 
period of time allowed to him, the taxes which were evaded to his benefit through the perpetration o f the 
act, the interest payable on the evaded taxes in accordance with section 235, and the interest payable 
under section 233a insofar as such interest is charged on the interest payable on the evaded taxes in Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 131 of 141 accordance with section 235(4). In cases cove red by the first sentence of subsection (2a) above, the first 
sentence above shall apply with the proviso that the timely payment of interest in accordance with 
section 233a or section 235 is immaterial.  
(4) Where the notification provided for in section 1 53 is punctually and duly filed, a third party who failed 
to make the statements referred to in section 153 or who made such statements incorrectly or 
incompletely shall not be prosecuted unless he or his representative was previously notified of the 
initiation of criminal or administrative fine proceedings resulting from the act. Subsection (3) above shall 
apply accordingly where the third party has acted for his own benefit.  
Section 372  
Illegal import, export, or transit of goods  
(1) Whoever imports, expo rts or transports goods in violation of a prohibition shall be deemed to have 
illegally imported, exported or transported goods.  
(2) The perpetrator shall be punished pursuant to section 370(1) and (2) where the act is not subject to 
punishment or a moneta ry fine as a violation of import, export, or transit prohibitions pursuant to other 
provisions.  
Section 373  
Professional, violent or organised smuggling  
(1) Whoever evades import or export duties on a commercial basis or who illegally imports, exports or 
transports goods on a commercial basis in contravention of monopoly regulations shall be subject to 
imprisonment for a period of six months to 10 years. In less serious cases, the penalty shall be 
imprisonment for up to five years or a monetary fine.  
(2) Pu nishment shall also be imposed on any person who  
1. evades import or export duties or illegally imports, exports or transports goods, and in 
committing these acts he or another participant carries a firearm,  
2. evades import or export duties or illegally i mports, exports or transports goods, and in 
committing these acts he or another participant carries with him a weapon or some other tool or 
means to prevent or overcome the resistance of another person by violence or by the threat of 
violence, or  
3.  as a member of a group formed for the purpose of repeatedly evading import or export 
duties or of illegally importing, exporting or transporting goods, commits such an act.  
(3) Attempted perpetration shall be punishable.  
(4) Section 370(6), first sentence, and (7) shall apply accordingly.  
Section 374  
Receiving, holding or selling goods obtained by tax evasion  
(1) Imprisonment for up to five years or a monetary fine shall be imposed upon any person who 
purchases or otherwise acquires for himself or for a third pa rty, sells or helps to sell products or goods in 
connection with which (a) excise duties or import and export duties pursuant to Article 5 numbers 20 and 
21 of the Union Customs Code have been evaded or (b) the illegal import, export or transit of goods 
pursuant to section 372(2) and section 373 has been committed, with the aim of enri ching himself or a 
third party.  
(2) Where the perpetrator acts commercially or as a member of a group formed for the purpose of 
repeatedly committing crimes pursuant to subsec tion (1) above, a penalty of between six months and ten 
year’s imprisonment shall be imposed. In less serious cases, the penalty shall be imprisonment for up to 
five years or a monetary fine.  
(3) Attempted perpetration shall be punishable.  
(4) Section 370( 6) and (7) shall apply accordingly.  
Section 375  
Incidental consequences  
(1) In addition to at least one year’s imprisonment for  
1. tax evasion,  
2. illegally importing, exporting or transporting goods pursuant to section 372(2), section 373,  
3. receiving, h olding or selling goods obtained by tax evasion, or  
4. aiding and abetting a person who has committed an act under numbers 1 to 3 above,  
the court may disqualify someone from holding public office and acquiring rights from public elections 
(section 45(2) of the Criminal Code).  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 132 of 141 (2) In cases where tax has been evaded, goods have been illegally imported, exported or transported 
pursuant to section 372(2) and section 373, or goods acquired by tax evasion have been received, held 
or sold,  
1. the products, goods  and other items in connection with which (a) excise duties or import 
and export duties pursuant to Article 5 numbers 20 and 21 of the Union Customs Code have been 
evaded or (b) the illegal import, export or transport of goods or the receiving, holding or selling of 
goods obtained by tax evasion has been committed, and  
2. the means of transport used in the act,  
may be confiscated. Section 74a of the Criminal Code shall apply.  
Section 376  
Limitation period for prosecution  
(1) In particularly serious cases of tax evasion as specified in section 370(3), second sentence, numbers 
1 to 6, the limitation period is 10 years.  
(2) The limitation period for the prosecution of a tax crime shall also be interrupted where the accused is 
notified of the initiation of adm inistrative fine proceedings or this notification is ordered.  
Second Chapter  
Provisions on administrative fines  
Section 377  
Tax-related administrative offences  
(1) Tax -related administrative offences (customs -related administrative offences) are offences t hat may 
be punished by monetary fine in accordance with this Code or other tax legislation.  
(2) The provisions of the first part of the Administrative Offences Act shall apply to tax -related 
administrative offences insofar as the administrative fine provis ions in this Code or in other tax legislation 
do not specify otherwise.  
Section 378  
Reckless understatement of tax  
(1) Whoever as a taxpayer or a person looking after the affairs of a taxpayer recklessly commits one of 
the acts described in section 370(1) shall be deemed to have committed an administrative offence. 
Section 370(4) to (7) shall apply accordingly.  
(2) The administrative offence may be punished with a monetary fine of up to 50,000 euros.  
(3) A monetary fine shall not be set insofar as the perpe trator corrects the incorrect particulars submitted 
to the revenue authority, supplements the incomplete particulars submitted to the revenue authority, or 
furnishes the revenue authority with the previously omitted particulars before he or his representat ive 
has been notified of the initiation of criminal or administrative fine proceedings resulting from the act. 
Where tax has already been understated or tax advantages have already been derived, a monetary fine 
shall not be set if the perpetrator pays, wit hin the reasonable period of time allowed to him, the taxes that 
were understated to his benefit on the basis of this act. Section 371(4) shall apply accordingly.  
Section 379  
General minor tax fraud  
(1) An administrative offence shall be deemed to have bee n committed by any person who intentionally 
or recklessly  
1.  issues documents that are factually incorrect,  
2.  places documents into circulation for a fee,  
3.  fails to record or to have recorded, records or has recorded in a factually incorrect manner, 
fails to enter or have entered in the accounts, or enters or has entered in the accounts in a factually 
incorrect manner, transactions or business activity that according to the law must be entered in the 
accounts or otherwise recorded,  
4.  fails to use a system as prescribed in the first sentence of section 146(1) or uses such a 
system incorrectly,  
5.  fails to protect a system as prescribed in the second sentence of section 146(1) or protects 
such a system incorrectly or  
6.  advertises or markets a system  or software for commercial purposes in violation of the fifth 
sentence of section 146a(1)  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 133 of 141 and in so doing enables taxes to be understated or unwarranted tax advantages to be derived. The first 
sentence, number 1 above shall also apply where import or expo rt duties that are administered by 
another Member State of the European Union or to which a State, which on the basis of an association 
agreement or preferential agreement grants preferential treatment to goods deriving from the European 
Union, is entitled  can be understated; section 370(7) shall apply accordingly. The same shall apply 
where the act relates to valued -added taxes that are administered by another Member State of the 
European Union.  
(2) An administrative offence shall be deemed to be committed  by any person who intentionally or 
recklessly  
1. fails to comply at all, in full or on time with the notification requirements under the first 
sentence of section 138(2),  
1a. fails to prepare a record at all, correctly, or completely, in violation of sect ion 144(1) or (2), 
first sentence, in conjunction with section 144(5),  
1b. contravenes an ordinance pursuant to section 177c(1) or an enforceable order based on 
such an ordinance, insofar as the ordinance refers to this provision on fines for a specified o ffence,  
1c.  fails to submit a country -by-country report fully or on time (section 138a(6)) in violation of 
section 138a(1), (3) or (4) or fails to provide notification fully or on time (section 138a(6)) in violation 
of the third sentence of section 138a(4 ). 
1d.  fails to comply at all, in full or on time with the notification requirements under section 
138b(1) to (3),  
2. breaches the obligations under section 154(1) to (2c).  
(3) An administrative offence shall be deemed to be committed by any person who in tentionally or 
negligently contravenes a condition pursuant to section 120(2) number 4 to which an administrative act 
has been attached for the purposes of special fiscal supervision (sections 209 to 217).  
(4) In cases where the relevant actions cannot be punished pursuant to section 378, administrative 
offences under subsection (1), first sentence, numbers 1 and 2, subsection (2) numbers 1 to 1b and 
number 2 and subsection (3) may be punished with a fine of up to 5,000 euros, administrative offences 
under subsection 2 number 1c may be punished with a fine of up to 10,000 euros, and administrative 
offences under subsection 1, first sentence, numbers 3 to 6 may be punished with a fine of up to 25,000 
euros.  
Section 380  
Endangerment of withholding taxes  
(1) An  administrative offence shall be deemed to be committed by any person who intentionally or 
recklessly fails to comply at all, in full or in time with his obligation to withhold or remit to revenue 
authorities tax amounts which are due.  
(2) The administrati ve offence may be punished with a monetary fine of up to 25,000 euros where the 
action cannot be punished pursuant to section 378.  
Section 381  
Endangerment of excise tax  
(1) An administrative offence shall be deemed to be committed by any person who intent ionally or 
recklessly contravenes the provisions of excise laws or the ordinances issued in connection therewith  
1. on the obligations regarding the preparation, safeguarding or subsequent auditing of 
taxation,  
2. on the packaging and labelling of product s subject to excise duty or goods containing such 
products, or on the restrictions on trade or use for such products or goods, or  
3. on the use of untaxed goods in free ports  
insofar as excise laws or the ordinances issued in connection therewith refer to this provision on fines for 
a specified offence.  
(2) The administrative offence may be punished with a monetary fine of up to 5,000 euros where the 
action cannot be punished pursuant to section 378.  
Section 382  
Endangerment of import and export duties  
(1) An administrative offence shall be deemed to be committed by any person who, as the liable party or 
the person looking after the affairs of a liable party, intentionally or negligently contravenes customs Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 134 of 141 regulations, ordinances issued in connection therew ith or Regulations of the Council of the European 
Union or the European Commission which apply  
1. to the recording by customs of the movement of goods across the frontiers of the customs 
territory of the European Communities as well as across the free zone  borders,  
2. to the placement of goods under a customs procedure and the implementation thereof or to 
obtaining another customs -approved treatment or use of goods,  
3. to the free zones, border areas and territories subject to border surveillance  
insofar a s such customs regulations or ordinances issued in connection therewith or issued on the basis 
of subsection (4) below refer to this provision on fines for a specified offence.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall also apply where the customs regulations and the  ordinances issued in 
connection therewith apply mutatis mutandis  to excise duties.  
(3) The administrative offence may be punished with a monetary fine of up to 5,000 euros where the 
action cannot be punished pursuant to section 378.  
(4) The Federal Minist ry of Finance may issue ordinances specifying the elements of offences contained 
in Regulations of the Council of the European Union or the European Commission which may be 
punished pursuant to subsections (1) to (3) above as administrative offences subjec t to a monetary fine 
insofar as this is necessary for the implementation of these laws and insofar as such elements concern 
obligations regarding the presentation, storage or treatment of goods, the submission of declarations or 
notifications, the keeping of written records, or the completion or submission of customs documents or 
the inclusion of notes in such documents.  
Section 383  
Unauthorised acquisition of cl aims to a tax refund and rebate  
(1) An administrative offence shall be deemed to be committed by  any person who, in breach of section 
46(4), first sentence, acquires claims to refunds or rebates.  
(2) The administrative offence may be punished with a monetary fine of up to 50,000 euros.  
Section 383a  
(rescinded)  
Section 383b  
Breach of obligations in tr ansmitting data contained in authorisations granting powers of 
representation  
(1) An administrative offence shall be deemed to be committed by any person who intentionally or 
recklessly  
1.  transmits to the revenue authorities authorisations granting power s of representation that 
contain incorrect data, in violation of the third sentence of section 80a(1) or  
2.  fails, in violation of the fourth sentence of section 80a(1), to notify the revenue authorities 
without delay if a principal revokes or modifies a n authorisation transmitted in accordance with 
section 80a(1).  
(2) The administrative offence may be punished with a fine of up to 10,000 euros.  
Section 384  
Limitation period for prosecution  
The period of limitation for the prosecution of tax -related admin istrative offences pursuant to sections 
378 to 380 shall become time -barred after five years.  
Section 384a  
Infringements under Article 83(4) to (6) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679  
(1) The provisions in this Code and in other tax legislation that pertain to tax -related administrative 
offences shall not apply to the extent that Article 83 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 simultaneously applies, 
directly or in accordance with section 2a(5), to an offence.  
(2) Section 41 of the Federal Data Protection Act shall apply ac cordingly to infringements under Article 
83(4) to (6) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 that fall within the scope of this Code.  
(3) A notification as per Article 33 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or a communication as per Article 34(1) 
of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 may be used in criminal proceedings or administrative fine proceedings 
against a reportable person or one of that person’s relatives as specified in section 52(1) of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure only with the consent of the reportable person.  
(4) Within the scope of this Code, no administrative fines as per Article 83(4) to (6) of Regulation (EU) 
2016/679 may be imposed against revenue authorities and other public entities.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 135 of 141 Third Chapter  
Criminal proceedings  
1st Subchapter  
General provisions  
Section 385  
Validity of procedural rules  
(1) Unless otherwise specified in the following provisions, criminal proceedings for tax crimes shall be 
governed by the general laws on criminal proceedings, namely the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Act 
on the Constitution of  Courts and the Juvenile Courts Act.  
(2) With the exception of section 386(2) as well as sections 399 to 401, the provisions of this chapter 
applicable to tax crimes shall apply accordingly where there is suspicion of a crime aimed at obtaining 
pecuniary b enefits by misrepresenting facts of significance for taxation to the revenue authority or 
another authority and no law regarding tax crimes is infringed.  
Section 386  
Jurisdiction of the revenue auth ority in the case of tax crimes  
(1) Where a tax crime is s uspected, the revenue authority shall investigate the facts of the case. The 
revenue authority within the meaning of this chapter shall be the main customs office, the tax office, the 
Federal Central Tax Office and the child benefits disbursement office.  
(2) The revenue authority shall conduct the investigation independently within the limits laid down in 
sections 399(1), 400 and 401 where the act  
1. is exclusively a tax crime or  
2. simultaneously violates other criminal laws, and such violation involves ch urch taxes or 
other public -law levies linked to tax bases , base amounts of non -personal taxes or tax amounts.  
(3) Subsection (2) above shall not apply as soon as an arrest warrant or a remand to a psychiatric 
hospital centre is issued against the accused for the act.  
(4) The revenue authority may hand the criminal matter over to the public prosecutor’s office at any time. 
The public prosecutor’s office may take over the criminal matter at any time. In both cases, the public 
prosecutor’s office may, with th e mutual agreement of the revenue authority, return the criminal matter to 
the revenue authority.  
Section 387  
Revenue authority with subject -matter jurisdiction  
(1) The revenue authority administering the tax concerned shall have subject -matter jurisdictio n. 
(2) Jurisdiction pursuant to subsection (1) above may be assigned by way of ordinance to one revenue 
authority for an area covered by several revenue authorities, insofar as this appears appropriate 
considering the economic situation or transport infras tructure, the structure of the administrative 
authorities and other local needs. Such ordinances shall be issued by the government of a Land  insofar 
as the revenue authority is an authority of that Land , and in all other cases by the Federal Ministry of 
Finance. An ordinance issued by the Federal Ministry of Finance shall not require the consent of the 
Bundesrat. The Federal Ministry of Finance may delegate the powers under the first sentence above to a 
higher federal authority by way of an ordinance that s hall not require the consent of the Bundesrat. The 
government of a Land  may delegate these powers to the highest authority of the Land  responsible for 
the revenue administration.  
Section 388  
Revenue authority with local jurisdiction  
(1) The revenue authori ty with local jurisdiction shall be the revenue authority  
1. in whose district the tax crime was committed or detected,  
2. which is responsible for the fiscal matters at the time of initiating the criminal proceedings, 
or 
3. in whose district the accused h as his residence at the time of initiating the criminal 
proceedings.  
(2) Where the residence of the accused changes following the initiation of criminal proceedings, the 
revenue authority in whose district the new residence is located shall also have local  jurisdiction. The 
same shall apply where the revenue authority’s jurisdiction for fiscal matters changes.  
(3) Where the accused does not have his residence within the territory of application of this Code, 
jurisdiction shall be determined by the habitual abode as well.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 136 of 141 Section 389  
Related criminal matters  
In the case of related criminal matters, which would, pursuant to section 388, individually fall within the 
jurisdiction of several revenue authorities, each of these revenue authorities shall be competen t. Section 
3 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply accordingly.  
Section 390  
Multiple jurisdiction  
(1) Where, pursuant to sections 387 to 389, several revenue authorities have jurisdiction, the revenue 
authority which first initiated criminal proceedin gs regarding the act shall be given precedence.  
(2) At the request of this revenue authority, another revenue authority responsible shall take over the 
criminal matter where this appears expedient for the investigations. In cases of doubt, the authority to  
which the requested revenue authority is subordinate shall decide.  
Section 391  
Competent court  
(1) Where the local court has subject -matter jurisdiction, the local court in whose district the Land  court 
has its seat shall have local jurisdiction. Irrespec tive of a wider provision pursuant to section 58(1) of the 
Act on the Constitution of Courts, this shall apply in preparatory proceedings only with regard to the 
consent of the court pursuant to section 153(1) and section 153a(1) of the Code of Criminal Pr ocedure.  
(2) Notwithstanding the first sentence of subsection (1) above, the government of a Land  may issue 
ordinances specifying jurisdiction insofar as this appears appropriate considering the economic situation 
or transport infrastructure, the structure  of the administrative authorities and other local needs. The 
government of a Land  may transfer this power to the justice authorities of the Land . 
(3) Criminal proceedings for tax crimes should be allocated to a particular department at a local court.  
(4) Subsections (1) to (3) above shall also apply where the proceedings concern not only tax crimes; 
they shall not apply, however, where the same action constitutes a crime pursuant to the Narcotics Act 
or where a tax crime concerns motor vehicle tax.  
Section  392 
Defence  
(1) Notwithstanding section 138(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, tax consultants, tax 
representatives, auditors and certified accountants may also be appointed to the defence insofar as the 
revenue authority conducts the criminal proceedi ngs independently; in all other cases, they may lead the 
defence only together with lawyer or teacher of law at a German institution of higher education within the 
meaning of the Framework Act for Higher Education who is qualified to exercise the functions  of a judge.  
(2) Section 138(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure shall remain unaffected.  
Section 393  
Relationship between criminal proceedings and the taxation procedure  
(1) The rights and obligations of the taxpayers and of the revenue authority in the taxation procedure and 
in criminal proceedings shall be determined by the regulations which apply to the proceedings in the 
particular case. In the taxation procedure, however, coercive measures (section 328) against the 
taxpayer shall be impermissible whe re this would force him to incriminate himself in a tax crime or tax -
related administrative offence which he committed. This shall invariably apply where criminal 
proceedings have been initiated against him for such an act. The taxpayer shall be instructed  
accordingly as necessary.  
(2) Where during criminal proceedings the public prosecutor’s office or the court learns from the tax 
records of facts or evidence which the taxpayer, in compliance with his obligations under tax law, 
revealed to the revenue auth ority before the initiation of criminal proceedings or in ignorance of the 
initiation of criminal proceedings, this knowledge may not be used against him for the prosecution of an 
act that is not a tax crime. This shall not apply to crimes for the prosecut ion of which there is a 
compelling public int erest (section 30(4) number 5).  
(3) Findings which the revenue authority or the public prosecutor’s office lawfully gained in the course of 
criminal investigations may be used in the taxation procedure. This sha ll also apply with respect to 
findings subject to the privacy of correspondence, posts and telecommunications to the extent that the 
revenue authority legally obtained them within in the course of their own criminal investigations or to the 
extent that inf ormation may be issued to the revenue authorities pursuant to the provisions of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure.  
Section 394  
Transfer of ownership  
Where an unknown person, who was caught in the act of committing a tax crime but escaped, has left 
items behin d and these items are seized or otherwise secured because it is possible to confiscate them, Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 137 of 141 they shall become the property of the State after one year has elapsed if the owner of the items is 
unknown and the revenue authority has announced the impending l oss of the property by means of a 
public notice. Section 10(2), first sentence, of the Administrative Service of Documents Act shall apply 
subject to the condition that an announcement of the notice pursuant to the first sentence above has 
been published. The period shall begin with the displaying of the announcement.  
Section 395  
Revenue authority’s power to inspect files  
The revenue authority shall be authorised to inspect the files which are available to the court or which 
would have to be presented to th e court in the case of charges being brought, as well as inspect 
confiscated or secured objects. The files shall be sent to the revenue authority upon application for 
inspection.  
Section 396  
Suspending proceedings  
(1) Where whether the act can be adjudged to constitute tax evasion depends on whether a tax claim 
exists, whether taxes have been understated or whether unwarranted tax advantages have been 
derived, the criminal proceedings shall be suspended until the taxation procedure is concluded and can 
no longer be appealed.  
(2) During investigations, the public prosecutor’s office shall rule on the suspension; in the proceedings 
once public charges have been brought, the court dealing with the matter shall rule on the suspension.  
(3) The limitation shall be  adjourned while the proceedings are suspended.  
2nd Subchapter  
Investigation  
I. General  
Section 397  
Initiating criminal proceedings  
(1) Criminal proceedings shall be deemed to have been initiated as soon as the revenue authority, the 
police, the public pro secutor’s office, one of its investigators or the judge in a criminal court adopts a 
measure, the purpose of which is identifiably to institute criminal action against somebody for a tax 
crime.  
(2) The measure and the time at which it was taken shall be en tered in the records without undue delay.  
(3) The accused shall be informed of the initiation of criminal proceedings at the latest when he is called 
upon to reveal facts or supply documents which are related to the crime of which he is suspected.  
Section 398 
Stay on the grounds of insignificance  
The public prosecutor’s office may refrain, even without the consent of the court responsible for opening 
the main proceedings, from prosecuting tax evasion where only a minor understatement of tax has 
occurred or where only minor tax advantages have been derived, if the perpetrator’s degree of guilt is 
slight and there is no public interest in the prosecution. This shall apply accordingly to proceedings 
brought for the receipt, holding or sale of goods obtained by tax evasion pursuant to section 374 and for 
aiding and abetting a person who has committed one of the acts under section 375(1) numbers 1 to 3.  
Section 398a  
Refraining from prosecution in certain cases  
(1) In cases where exemption from punishment is denied  solely on the basis of section 371(2), first 
sentence, numbers 3 or 4, prosecution shall not occur if, within the reasonable period of time allowed to 
him, the person involved in the act  
1.  pays the taxes which were evaded to his benefit through the perp etration of the act, the 
interest payable on the evaded taxes in accordance with section 235, and the interest payable under 
section 233a insofar as such interest is charged on the interest payable on the evaded taxes in 
accordance with section 235(4), and  
2.  pays to the Treasury a sum of money in the following amount:  
a) 10 percent of the evaded tax where the amount evaded does not exceed 100,000 euros,  
b) 15 percent of the evaded tax where the amount evaded exceeds 100,000 euros but does 
not exceed 1,000 ,000 euros,  
c) 20 percent of the evaded tax where the amount evaded exceeds 1,000,000 euros.  
(2) The calculation of the amount evaded shall be based on the principles set forth in section 370(4).  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 138 of 141 (3) The resumption of a procedure concluded in accordance wi th subsection (1) above shall be 
permissible if the revenue authority finds that the information provided as part of a voluntary disclosure 
was incomplete or incorrect.  
(4) The sum of money paid in accordance with subsection (1) number 2 above shall not be  reimbursed if 
the legal consequence of subsection (1) fails to materialise. However, the court may credit this amount to 
a monetary fine imposed for tax evasion.  
II. Revenue authority procedure in the case of tax crimes  
Section 399  
Revenue authority’s rig hts and obligations  
(1) Where the revenue authority conducts the investigation independently pursuant to section 386(2), the 
revenue authority shall have the same rights and obligations as the public prosecutor’s office has in an 
investigation.  
(2) Where a  revenue authority has been given jurisdiction pursuant to section 387(2) for an area covered 
by several revenue authorities, the right and obligation of these revenue authorities to investigate the 
facts where a tax crime is suspected and to issue all non -deferrable orders to avoid obfuscation of the 
case shall remain unaffected. They may order confiscation, emergency sales, searches, inspections and 
other measures in accordance with the regulations of the Code of Criminal Procedure applying to the 
public prosecution office’s investigators.  
Section 400  
Application for the order of summary punishment  
Where the results of the investigations provide sufficient grounds to bring a public charge, the revenue 
authority shall apply to the judge to issue an order of  summary punishment where the criminal matter 
appears suited to treatment in summary proceedings without trial; where this is not so, the revenue 
authority shall give the files to the public prosecutor’s office.  
Section 401  
Application to order incidental consequences in autonomous proceedings  
Revenue authorities may file an application for the authorisation to order sequestration autonomously or 
to set a fine against a legal person or association autonomously (sections 435 and 444(3) of the Code of 
Crimina l Procedure).  
III. Role of the revenue authority in procedures carried out by the public prosecutor  
Section 402  
General rights and obligations of the revenue authority  
(1) Where the public prosecutor’s office conducts the investigation, the revenue authori ty which would 
otherwise have had jurisdiction shall have the same rights and obligations as the police authorities under 
the Code of Criminal Procedure as well as the powers pursuant to section 399(2), second sentence.  
(2) Where a revenue authority has be en transferred pursuant to section 387(2) jurisdiction for an area 
covered by several revenue authorities, subsection (1) above shall apply for each of these revenue 
authorities.  
Section 403  
Participation of the revenue authority  
(1) Where the public prose cutor’s office or the police authorities conduct investigations concerning tax 
crimes, the revenue authority which would otherwise have had jurisdiction shall be entitled to participate. 
The revenue authority should be informed in good time of the place an d time of the investigative actions. 
The representative of the revenue authority shall be permitted to pose questions to the accused persons, 
witnesses and experts.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall apply mutatis mutandis  to court hearings at which the public  prosecutor’s 
officer is also permitted to attend.  
(3) The revenue authority which would otherwise have had jurisdiction shall be informed of the charge 
and the application for the order of summary punishment.  
(4) Where the public prosecutor’s office consi ders staying the proceedings, it shall consult the revenue 
authority that would otherwise have had jurisdiction.  
IV. Tax and customs investigation  
Sect ion 404  
Tax and customs investigation  
The Customs Investigation Offices and the agencies of Land  revenue authorities which are responsible 
for tax investigation as well as their officials shall, in criminal proceedings for tax crimes, have the same 
rights and obligations as the police authorities and officers according to the regulations of the Code of Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 139 of 141 Crimin al Procedure. The agencies described in the first sentence above shall have the powers pursuant 
to section 399(2), second sentence, as well as the power to examine the papers of those affected by the 
search (section 110(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure ); their officers shall be investigators of the 
public prosecutor’s office.  
V. Reimbursement for witnesses and experts  
Section 405  
Reimbursement for witnesses and experts  
Where the revenue authority consults witnesses and experts for the purposes of eviden ce, these shall be 
compensated or remunerated in corresponding application of the Judicial Remuneration and 
Compensation Act. This shall also apply in the cases set out in section 404.  
3rd Subchapter  
Judicial proceedings  
Section 406  
Revenue authorities’ ro le in summary proceed ings and autonomous proceedings  
(1) Where the revenue authority has applied for an order of summary punishment to be issued, the 
revenue authority shall have the rights and obligations of the public prosecutor’s office as long as no 
date for a trial is appointed pursuant to section 408(3), second sentence, of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, and no objection has been lodged against the order of summary punishment.  
(2) In cases where revenue authorities have filed an application for the a uthorisation to order 
sequestration autonomously or to set a fine against a legal person or association autonomously (section 
401), the revenue authorities shall exercise the rights and obligations of the public prosecutor’s office as 
long as no applicatio n for oral hearings has been filed and no oral hearings have been ordered by a 
court.  
Section 407  
Participation of the revenue authority in other cases  
(1) The court shall allow the revenue authority opportunity to present aspects which, from its perspecti ve, 
are of relevance to the decision. This shall also apply where the court considers staying the proceedings. 
The revenue authority shall be informed of the date of the trial and the date of the hearing by a 
commissioned or requested judge (sections 223 a nd 233 of the Code of Criminal Procedure). Upon 
request, the revenue authority’s representative shall be allowed to speak during the trial. The 
representative shall be allowed to pose questions to the defendants, witnesses and experts.  
(2) The revenue auth ority shall be informed of the ruling and other decisions concluding the proceedings.  
4th Subchapter  
Costs of the proceedings  
Section 408  
Costs of the proceedings  
In criminal proceedings for a tax crime, necessary expenses of a participant within the meani ng of 
section 464a(2) number 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure shall include the legal fees and expenses 
for a tax consultant, tax representative, auditor or certified accountant. Where there are no legal 
provisions on fees and expenses, they may be reim bursed up to the amount of the legal fees and 
expenses of a lawyer.  
Fourth Chapter  
Administrative fine proceedings  
Section 409  
Competent administrative authority  
In the case of tax -related administrative offences, the competent administrative authority wit hin the 
meaning of section 36(1) number 1 of the Administrative Offences Act shall be the revenue authority with 
subject -matter jurisdiction pursuant to section 387(1). Section 387(2) shall apply accordingly.  
Section 410  
Supplementary provisions on adminis trative fine proceedings  
(1) Apart from the procedural provisions, the provisions of the Administrative Offences Act shall apply 
accordingly to administrative fine proceedings:  
1. sections 388 to 390 on the jurisdiction of the revenue authority,  
2. sectio n 391 on the jurisdiction of the court,  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 140 of 141 3. section 392 on the defence,  
4. section 393 on the relationship between criminal proceedings and the taxation procedure,  
5. section 396 on the suspension of proceedings,  
6. section 397 on the initiation of criminal  proceedings,  
7. section 399(2) on the rights and obligations of the revenue authority,  
8. sections 402, 403(1), (3) and (4) on the role of the revenue authority in procedures carried 
out by the public prosecutor,  
9. section 404, first sentence and the fir st half -sentence of the second sentence on tax and 
customs investigation,  
10. section 405 on compensation for witnesses and experts,  
11. section 407 on the participation of the revenue authorities and  
12. section 408 on the costs of proceedings.  
(2) Where the revenue authority prosecutes a tax crime connected with a tax -related administrative 
offence (section 42(1), second sentence, of the Administrative Offences Act), the revenue authority may, 
in the cases of section 400, apply to extend the order of summ ary punishment to the tax -related 
administrative offence.  
Section 411  
Administrative fine proceedings against lawyers, tax consultants, tax representatives,  auditors 
or certified accountants  
Before an administrative fine notice is issued against a lawyer, tax consultant, tax representative, auditor 
or certified accountant for a tax -related administrative offence which he committed in the exercise of his 
profession in advising on tax matters, the revenue authority shall allow the competent professional 
organ isation the opportunity to present aspects which, from its perspective, are of relevance to the 
decision.  
Section 412  
Service, enforcement, costs  
(1) Notwithstanding section 51(1), first sentence, of the Administrative Offences Act, the provisions of the 
Administrative Service of Documents Act shall also apply to the method of service of documents even 
where a Land  revenue authority has issued the notice. Section 51(1), second sentence, and section 
51(2) to (5) of the Administrative Offences Act shall remai n unaffected.  
(2) Notwithstanding section 90(1) and (4), section 108(2) of the Administrative Offences Act, the 
provisions of the Sixth Part of this Code shall apply to the enforcement of revenue authority notices in 
administrative fine proceedings. The re maining provisions of the ninth chapter of the Second Part of the 
Administrative Offences Act shall remain unaffected.  
(3) Section 107(4) of the Administrative Offences Act shall also apply to the costs of administrative fine 
proceedings even where a Land  revenue authority has issued the administrative fine notice; section 227 
and section 261 of this Code shall apply in place of section 19 of the Administrative Costs Act, in the 
version in force until 14 August 2013.  
Ninth Part  
Final provisions  
Section 413  
Restriction of basic rights  
The basic rights to physical integrity and freedom of the person (Article 2(2) of the Basic Law), the 
privacy of correspondence, posts and telecommunications (Article 10 of the Basic Law) and the 
inviolability of the home (Artic le 13 of the Basic Law) shall be restricted in accordance with this Code.  
Section 414  
(obsolete)  
Section 415  
Entry into force  
(1) This Code shall enter into force on 1 January 1977 unless the following subsections stipulate 
otherwise.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
 
Page 141 of 141 (2) Section 19(5), se ction 117(5), section 134(3), section 139(2), section 150(6), section 156(1), section 
178(3), section 212, section 382(4), section 387(2) and section 391(2) shall enter into force on th e date 
after its promulgation.  
(3) Sections 52 and 55 shall apply for t he first time from 1 January 1984.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 1 of 37 Übersetzung durch den Sprachendienst des Deutschen Bundestages in Zusammenarbeit 
mit Raymond Kerr.  
Translation provided by the Language Service of the German Bundestag in cooperation with 
Raymond Kerr . 
Stand: Die Übersetzung berücksichtigt die Änderung(en)  des Gesetzes durch Artikel 1 des 
Gesetzes vom 8. Oktober 2021 (BGBl. I S. 4650)  
Version information: The translation includes the amendment(s) to the Act by Article 1 of the 
Act of 8 October  2021 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 4650 ) 
 
Zur Nutzung dieser Überse tzung lesen Sie bitte den Hinweis auf www.gesetze -im-internet.de 
unter  "Translations" . 
 
For conditions governing use of this translation, please see the information provided at 
www.gesetze -im-internet.de under  "Translations" . 
 
 
Members of the Bundestag Act  
(Abgeordnetengesetz)  
Act on the Legal Status of Members of the German Bundestag as promulgated on  21 
February 1996 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 326) and last amended by Article 1 of the Act of 8 
October 2021  Improving the Transparency Rules for Members of the German Bundestag 
and Raising the Sentencing Limits Laid Down in Section 108e of the German Cri minal Code 
(Federal Law Gazette I, p. 4650)  
PART ONE  
Acquisition and loss of membership of the Bundestag  
Section 1  
Acquisition and loss of membership of the Bundestag  
The acquisition and loss of membership of the Bundestag are governed by the provisions of  
the Federal Electoral Act.  
PART TWO  
Membership of the Bundestag and professional activity  
Section 2  
Protection of the free exercise of an electoral mandate  
(1) No one may be prevented from standing as a candidate for a mandate to serve as a 
Member of the Bundestag or from acquiring, accepting or holding such a mandate.  
(2) Discrimination at work on the grounds of candidature for or acquisition, acceptance and 
exercise of a mandate shall be inadmissible.  
(3) Termination of an employment contract or dismissa l on grounds of the acquisition, 
acceptance or exercise of a mandate shall be inadmissible. In all other respects, termination 
of an employment contract shall only be permitted for a compelling reason. Protection 
against termination or dismissal shall take  effect on the selection of the candidate by the 
relevant party organ or on submission of the list of nominated candidates. It shall continue to 
apply for one year after the end of the Member’s term of office.  
Section 3  
Election leave  
During the two months  immediately prior to polling day, a candidate for a seat in the 
Bundestag shall be granted leave of up to two months on request for the purpose of Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 2 of 37 preparing for the election. There shall be no entitlement to continued payment of 
emolume nts during the peri od of leave.  
Section 4  
Seniority and length of service  
(1) After the end of the Member’s term of office, his or her period of membership of the 
Bundestag shall be credited to his or her professional seniority and company service.  
(2) Within the context of  an existing pension scheme operated by a company or companies, 
the period referred to in subsection (1) above shall only be reckonable for the purpose of 
fulfilling the vesting periods prescribed in section 1 of the Improvement of Company Pension 
Schemes Act (Gesetz zur Verbesserung der b etrieblichen Altersversorgung ). 
PART THREE  
Legal status of public servants  elected to the Bundestag  
Section 5  
Suspension of the rights and duties  arising from employment in the public service  
(1) With the exception of the duty of confidentiality and the obligation to refrain from 
accepting rewards and gifts, the rights and duties arising from salaried membership of the 
permanent civil service shall be suspended from the date on which the election result was 
established by t he Federal Electoral Committee (first sentence of section 42(2) of the 
Federal Electoral Act ( Bundeswahlgesetz )), or on which a permanent civil servant accepted 
his or her mandate, for the period of his or her term of office. The same shall apply where a 
Member of the Bundestag is appointed to such a position in the public service from the date 
on which the appointment takes effect. The civil servant shall be entitled to use his or her 
official title or grade with the addition of the word "retired" (" außer Dienst ", "a.D."). The 
foregoing provisions shall be without prejudice to the right to treatment and compensation of 
civil servants who have been injured in an accident. The first sentence above shall apply for 
a period not extending beyond the civil servan t’s voluntary or compulsory retirement.  
(2) In the case of civil servants with non -active status, subsection (1) above shall apply, 
mutatis mutandis , for a period not extending beyond the date of their final voluntary or 
compulsory retirement.  
(3) A tempo rary civil servant undergoing practical professional training who is elected to the 
Bundestag shall be granted unpaid leave on request. If, after passing the professional 
examination, the trainee is appointed as a probationary civil servant, his or her rig hts and 
duties in the latter capacity shall be suspended pursuant to subsection (1) above from the 
date on which the appointment takes effect.  
Section 6  
Reinstatement after expiry of a mandate  
(1) When a civil servant ceases to be a Member of the Bundestag , his or her rights and 
duties as a civil servant shall remain suspended for a maximum of six months. On 
application, which must be made within three months from the end of his or her term of 
office, the civil servant shall be reinstated within three month s from the date of the 
application. The category within the career structure to which the civil servant is appointed 
must be the same as, or equivalent to, his or her former category and must attract at least 
the same final basic salary. He or she shall re ceive the emoluments payable in respect of his 
or her former position with effect from the date of  application for reinstatement.  
(2) If the civil servant does not make his or her application within three months from the end 
of his or her membership of the  Bundestag in accordance with subsection (1) above, the 
rights and duties arising from membership of the civil service shall remain suspended 
(section 5(1) of this Act) until the date of voluntary or compulsory retirement.  If, however, the 
civil servant h as neither been a Member of the Bundestag for at least two electoral terms nor 
reached his or her fifty -fifth birthday on ceasing to be a Member of the Bundestag, the Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 3 of 37 highest administrative authority may reinstate the civil servant by appointing him or her  to a 
position in accordance with the third sentence of subsection (1) above; if the civil servant 
refuses reinstatement or fails to take up the appointment, he or she shall be dismissed. The 
second sentence above shall not apply if, during his or her memb ership of the Bundestag, 
the civil servant was a member of the Federal Government.  
Section 7  
Seniority in the public service  
(1) By way of derogation from the third sentence of section 27(3) of the Federal Pay Act 
(Bundesbesoldungsgesetz ) and without preju dice to section 23(5) of the present Act, the 
period of membership of the Bundestag shall delay a federal civil servant's accrual of 
seniority on the pay scale to the extent that the application, mutatis mutandis , of section 
28(1) and (2) of the Federal Pa y Act as amended prior to 30 June 2009 has such effect.  
(2) If the civil servant is not reinstated in his or her former position in accordance with section 
6 of this Act, the accrual of seniority on the pay scale shall be suspended for the period from 
the end of his or her membership of the Bundestag until the date on which a pension 
becomes payable. If the civil servant is not reinstated in his or her former position in 
accordance with section 6 of this Act, his or her basic pay shall remain at the point o n the 
pay scale indicated by paragraph 1 above until he or she becomes eligible to draw a 
pension.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 23(5) of this Act, the period of membership 
of the Bundestag shall not count towards the period of service  as defined in pensions 
legislation. The same shall apply with regard to the period after the Member’s term of office if 
the civil servant is not reinstated in his or her former position pursuant to section 6 of this 
Act. 
(4) Once a civil servant has cease d to be a Member of the Bundestag, his or her term of 
office shall count towards the civil servant’s seniority in his or her present grade, excluding 
any probationary period.  
(5) In the case of public -service employees, once they cease to be Members of the  
Bundestag, their period of membership shall count towards their professional seniority and 
length of service; in the context of an existing supplementary retirement and surviving 
dependant’s pension, this shall only apply to provisions governing expectanc y or claims on 
the merits.  
Section 8  
Civil servants appointed for a fixed term, judges, members of the armed forces and 
public -service employees  
(1) Sections 5 to 7 of this Act shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to judges and to career 
members and fixed -term v olunteer members of the armed forces.  
(2) The rights and duties arising from engagement to serve for a fixed period in the armed 
forces shall be suspended for no longer than the period of the engagement, and those 
arising from appointment for a fixed perio d as a civil servant for no longer than  the period of 
the appointment.  
(3) Subsection (2) above and the provisions of sections 5, 6 and 7(1) to (4) shall apply, 
mutatis mutandis , to public -service employees. Public service within the meaning of this 
provis ion is work performed in the service of the Federal Republic, one of its constituent 
states ( Länder ), a local authority or other body, institution or foundation established under 
public law or associations thereof, with the exception of public religious so cieties and 
associations thereof.  
Section 9  
University staff with civil -servant status  
(1) With regard to the legal status of university professors and assistant professors within the 
meaning of Section 42 of the Framework Act for Higher Education ( Hochsch ulrahmengesetz ) Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 4 of 37 who are elected to the Bundestag, section 6 of the present Act shall apply, with the proviso 
that they must be reinstated in their former position at the same university.  
(2) During their term of office in the Bundestag, professors and assi stant professors may 
engage in research and teaching as well as providing assistance to doctoral and 
postdoctoral students. Remuneration for this work shall be calculated on the basis of actual 
performance. The remuneration may not exceed 25 per cent of th e income which would be 
paid under their contract of employment as professors or assistant professors. In all other 
respects, the provisions relating to federal civil servants shall apply.  
Section 10  
Electoral officials appointed for a fixed term  
The Lände r may enact legislation deviating from the regulations contained in section 6 of this 
Act in the case of electoral officials appointed for a fixed term.  
PART FOUR  
Benefits for Members of the Bundestag  
Section 11  
Members’ remuneration  
(1) A Member of the Bu ndestag shall receive a monthly remuneration based on the monthly 
income of a judge of the highest federal courts (salary group R6, as defined in Annex IV of 
the Federal Pay Act ( Bundesbesoldungsgesetz ), with the supplement for judges and public 
prosecutor s of the highest federal courts). A Member’s remuneration shall be 10,083.47 
euros. The procedure prescribed in subsections (4) and (5) below shall apply to subsequent 
adjustments.  
(2) The President of the Bundestag shall receive a monthly supplementary al lowance of one 
month’s salary as specified in subsection (1) above, his or her deputies shall receive a 
monthly supplementary allowance amounting to half of the monthly salary specified in 
subsection (1) above, and the chairpersons of committees, committee s of inquiry, study 
commissions and the Parliamentary Oversight Panel shall receive a monthly supplementary 
allowance corresponding to 15 per cent of the monthly amount specified in subsection (1) 
above.  
(3) The amount of a Member’s remuneration and of th e supplementary allowance shall be 
reduced by one three -hundred and sixty -fifth on account of grants towards the cost of 
nursing care awarded under section 27 of this Act from 1 January 1995.  
(4) The monthly remuneration specified in subsection (1) above s hall be adjusted annually 
on 1 July.* The basis shall be the development of the index of nominal earnings computed 
by the Federal Statistical Office, which the President of the Federal Statistical Office shall 
transmit to the President of the Bundestag by 31 March of each year. The latter shall publish 
the adjusted amount of remuneration in a Bundestag printed paper.  
(5) The adjustment procedure prescribed by subsection (4) above shall continue to apply in a 
new electoral term only if the Bundestag adopts a  decision to that effect within three months 
following the constituent sitting. If no decision is taken within that time, the last amount 
computed in accordance with subsection (4) above shall apply to Members’ remuneration 
until the Bundestag confirms or amends the adju stment procedure in a law.  
 
Footnote *:  With effect from 1 July 2021 the monthly remuneration amounts to 10,012.89 
euros (Bundestag printed paper 19/28929 of 26 April 2021).  
Section 12  
Members’ allowances  
(1) To cover costs incurred in conne ction with the exercise of his or her parliamentary 
mandate, a Member of the Bundestag shall receive various compensatory allowances. 
These shall comprise monetary allowances and benefits in kind.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 5 of 37 (2) A Member of the Bundestag shall receive a monthly expen se allowance to cover, in 
particular,  
1. office expenses for the establishment and upkeep of a constituency office 
outside the seat of the German Bundestag, including rent and utility and service charges, 
stock and office materials, literature and other co mmunication media and postage,  
2. additional expenditure incurred at the seat of the Bundestag and travel 
expenses, excluding the cost of official trips abroad,  
3. travel costs for trips in connection with the exercise of his or her mandate within 
the Fede ral Republic of Germany, without prejudice to the provisions of sections 16 and 
17 of this Act, and  
4. additional expenses for other costs incurred in connection with the exercise of a 
parliamentary mandate (representative functions, invitations, constitue ncy work, etc.) 
which are not otherwise defrayable from the professional remuneration and allowances 
paid to cover the cost of living.  
The expense allowance shall be adjusted each year on 1 January in line with the increase in 
the general cost of living of  all households in the previous year. * Details of the amount of the 
estimates for the individual flat -rate allowance, based on actual expenditure, and the amount 
of the adjustment shall be governed by the Budget Act ( Haushaltsgesetz ) and by 
implementing pr ovisions which shall be enacted by the Council of Elders ( Ältestenrat ). 
(3) On submission of evidence, a Member of the Bundestag shall receive reimbursement for 
employing staff to assist him or her in carrying out his or her parliamentary work. Entitlement  
to this reimbursement is not transferable to another Member of the Bundestag. 
Reimbursement of expenditure in respect of employment contracts concluded with staff who 
are or were married or related by blood or marriage to the Member of the Bundestag is no t 
permissible. The same shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to employment contracts concluded 
with the civil partner or former civil partner of a Member of the Bundestag. Details of the 
reimbursable amount of expenditure and the conditions of reimbursement, the  mandatory 
minimum requirements for the employment contract and other matters shall be governed by 
the Budget Act and the implementing provisions to be enacted by the Council of Elders. 
Salaries and other staff expenditure shall be paid by the Bundestag Ad ministration. The 
Bundestag shall not be liable to third parties. The staff shall not be public servants. No 
contractual relationship shall exist between the staff and the Bundestag Administration.  
(3a) Reimbursement is excluded for staff activities which do not serve to provide assistance 
in the performance of parliamentary work and which therefore must not be performed during 
working hours. The Presidium may impose a fine of up to half of the annual Member’s 
remuneration on any Member of the Bundestag who  contravenes this rule. The President 
shall validate this fine by means of an administrative act. The foregoing shall be without 
prejudice to section 31 of this Act. Details are laid down in the Code of Conduct set out in 
Part Eleven of this Act.   
(4) Mem bers’ allowances shall also include:  
1. the provision of a fully equipped office at the seat of the Bundestag,  
2. the use of transport facilities in accordance with section 16 of this Act,  
3. the use of official Bundestag vehicles,  
4. the provision and use of the common information and communication system of the 
Bundestag, and  
5. other Bundestag services.  
Details shall be regulated by the Budget Act and by implementing provisions which shall be 
enacted by the Council of Elders.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 6 of 37 (5) The President of the Bundestag shall receive a monthly official expense allowance of 
1,023 euros, and his or her deputies shall receive a monthly official expense allowance of 
307 euros.  
(6) A Member of the Bundestag who has the exclusive use of an official car shall receive a n 
expense allowance reduced by 25 per cent.  
 
Footnote *:  With effect from 1 January 2021 the expense allowance amounts to 4,560.59 
euros (Federal Gazette, official section, 2 November 2020, B1).  
Section 13  
Non-entitlement to reimbursement of expenses  
A Mem ber of the Bundestag elected to the Bundestag in the last quarter of the last year of 
an electoral term shall not have a right to benefits under section 12(2) and (3) of this Act if 
the Bundestag has already completed its work.  
Section 14  
Reduction of the expense allowance  
 (1) An attendance register shall be displayed on each sitting day. The President shall 
determine, in consultation with the Council of Elders, which days count as sitting days and 
the time during which the attendance register is to be dis played. If a Member of the 
Bundestag does not enter his or her name in the register, 100 euros shall be deducted from 
his or her expense allowance. The amount of the reduction shall be increased to 200 euros if 
a Member who has not been granted leave of ab sence fails to enter his or her name in the 
attendance register on the day of a plenary sitting. The amount of the deduction shall be 
reduced to 20 euros if a Member of the Bundestag presents a medical certificate attesting to 
a stay in hospital or in a sa natorium or to temporary incapacitation. During the period of 
maternity protection in the event of pregnancy or if a Member of the Bundestag has a child 
under the age of 14 living in his or her household who is certified ill by a doctor and for whom 
the Me mber must care personally because no other responsible person is available in the 
household to do so, the Member’s failure to enter his or her name in the attendance register 
shall not result in a reduction of the expense allowance. From the time when the attendance 
register is displayed, performance of the duties of President or Secretary, a minuted request 
to speak at a sitting of the German Bundestag, the use of a personal voting card in a 
recorded vote, participation in a roll -call vote, entry in the at tendance register of a committee 
or other body of the Bundestag, interventions at a meeting of a committee or other body of 
the Bundestag, entry in the attendance register of the Council of Elders or participation in an 
approved official trip on the day of  the sitting shall count as entr y in the attendance register.  
(2) A Member of the Bundestag who fails to cast a vote by voting card or roll -call shall have 
100 euros deducted from his or her monthly expense allowance. This shall not apply if the 
President has granted the Member leave of absence, if a deduction is made under 
subsection (1) above or in the circumstances described in the sixth sentence of subsection 
(1) above.  
Section 15  
Receipt of other per diem  or attendance allowances  
If a Member of the Bun destag receives a per diem  or attendance allowance from other public 
funds on the same day that he or she has entered his or her name on the Bundestag 
attendance register, 20 euros or the amount of the attendance allowance paid out of the 
other public fund s, whichever is the lesser, shall be deducted from his or her monthly 
expense allowance. The same shall apply to official trips abroad which fall on the day of a 
sitting.  
Section 16  
Right to free use of public transport and reimbursement of travel costs  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 7 of 37 (1) A Member of the Bundestag shall have the right to free use of all transport facilities of the 
rail operator Deutsche Bahn AG. If, in the exercise of his or her mandate in the Federal 
Republic of Germany, a Member uses internal flights, sleeping -cars or o ther forms of rail 
transport beyond the scope of local public transport networks, the cost shall be reimbursed 
up to the highest class on production of receipts.  
(2) For the duration of his or her entitlement to free travel, a Member of the Bundestag may 
not accept reimbursement of travel costs for domestic trips with Deutsche Bahn AG from any 
other source. The same shall apply to domestic travel undertaken as part of a trip abroad 
and to expenditure on flights and sleeping -cars where such expenditure is re imbursed under 
subsection (1) above.  
Section 17  
Official trips  
(1) Official trips shall require the prior approval of the President.  
(2) In the case of domestic trips, daily subsistence expenses shall be deemed to have been 
reimbursed through the expense allowance. By virtue of the application, mutatis mutandis , of 
the Federal Travel Expenses Act ( Bundesreisekostengesetz ), however, a Member of the 
Bundestag shall receive, on request, an overnight accommodation allowance as well as the 
reimbursement of his or her travel expenses. If a Member of the Bundestag proves that he or 
she has incurred an unusual level of expenditure, which cannot be covered by the overnight 
accommodation allowance, the unavoidable excess shall be reimbursed.  
(3) In the case of offici al trips abroad, a Member shall receive, on request, per diem  and 
overnight accommodation allowances. In addition, the following shall also be reimbursed:  
- in the case of rail travel, the cost of return travel from the federal border to the 
destination, a s well as the cost of a sleeping car, on production of receipts;  
- in the case or air travel, the attested cost of travel to and from the destination;   
- the cost of necessary travel by other means of transport.  
(4) On application, in the cases referred t o in subsections (2) and (3) above, a mileage 
payment shall be awarded in lieu of travel costs. It must not exceed the amount of 
expenditure which would have been reimbursable for travel by air under section 16(1) or 
section 17(3) of this Act. The amount o f the mileage payment shall be determined by the 
Council of Elders.  
(5) In all other respects, the provisions of the Federal Travel Expenses Act, as amended, 
shall apply, mutatis mutandis , unless otherwise determined by the Council of Elders.  
PART FIVE  
Benefits for former Members  of the Bundestag and their surviving dependants  
Section 18  
Transitional emoluments  
(1) An outgoing Member with at least one year of membership shall receive transitional 
emoluments. The transitional emoluments, amounting to the Mem bers’ remuneration 
specified in section 11(1) of this Act, shall be paid for one month for each year of 
membership, up to a maximum of eighteen months. Periods of earlier membership of the 
Bundestag for which transitional emoluments have already been paid are not reckonable. 
Membership of the Bundestag lasting more than half a year shall be regarded as a full year 
for the purposes of the calculation describe d in the second sentence above.  
(2) From the second month after the date of severance from the Bundes tag, all earned 
income and pension benefits shall be set off against the transitional emoluments. Income 
from membership of the European Parliament shall not be set off against these emoluments 
if the European Parliament already makes provision for the tra nsitional emoluments to be set 
off against its own remuneration.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 8 of 37 (3) On request, the transitional emoluments referred to in subsection (1) above may be paid 
as a single gratuity, or monthly at half the prescribed amount for double the prescribed 
period. Th e third sentence of subsection (1) shall apply, mutatis mutandis . 
(4) If the former Member re -enters the Bundestag, his or her entitlement to monthly 
payments under subsection (1) above shall be suspended. If the former Member has 
received the transitional  emoluments in the form of a gratuity, he or she shall repay the 
amount that would have accrued after the date of re -entry if he or she had been receiving 
monthly payments. The President shall determine the instalments in which this amount is to 
be repaid.  
(5) If a former Member dies, the benefits referred to in subsection (1) above shall continue to 
be paid to the surviving spouse, to the civil partner and to the former Member’s natural and 
adopted children or shall be left to them if no pension rights hav e accrued under this Act.  
(6) A former Member who belongs to the European Parliament may only claim his or her 
transitional emoluments after severance from the European Parliament.  
(7) Subsection (1) above shall not apply if the Member loses his or her mem bership of the 
Bundestag on the basis of section 15(2)(2) of the Federal Electoral Act. The President of the 
Bundestag may suspend payments if there are likely to be proceedings which give rise to the 
consequences described in section 15(2)(2) of the Feder al Electoral Act.  
Section 19  
Entitlement to receive superannuation benefits  
(1) After leaving the Bundestag, a Member shall receive superannuation benefits when he or 
she reaches his or her 67th birthday, provided that he or she belonged to the Bundestag f or 
at least one year.  
(2) Members of the Bundestag born before 1 January 1947 shall attain pensionable age on 
reaching their 65th birthday. For Members of the Bundestag born after 31 December 1946, 
pensionable age shall be raised as follows:  
 
Year of birth  Increase (in months)  New pensionable age  
years  months  
1947  1 65 1 
1948  2 65 2 
1949  3 65 3 
1950  4 65 4 
1951  5 65 5 
1952  6 65 6 
1953  7 65 7 
1954  8 65 8 
1955  9 65 9 
1956  10 65 10 
1957  11 65 11 
1958  12 66 0 
1959  14 66 2 
1960  16 66 4 
1961  18 66 6 
1962  20 66 8 
1963  22 66 10 
 
 
(3) If a former Member belonged to the Bundestag for two or more non -consecutive periods, 
the periods shall be added together. The fourth sentence of section 18(1) of this Act shall 
apply, mutatis mutandis . Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 9 of 37 (4) Upon app lication, superannuation benefits may be drawn early with effect from the former 
Member’s 63rd birthday. In this case, the superannuation benefits shall be reduced by 0.3 of 
a percentage point for each month prior to the pensionable age defined in subsecti ons (1) 
and (2) above in which superannuation benefits were drawn. Reckonability within the 
meaning of section 29 shall apply to the amount of superannuation benefits reduced 
pursuant to the second sentence of the present subsection.  
 
Until the date of the  first sitting of the 19th Bundestag, the following version of subsection 3 
above applied:  
 
(3) If a former Member belonged to the Bundestag for two or more non -consecutive periods, 
the periods shall be added together. With each year of membership of the B undestag 
beyond the eighth year, the right to receive superannuation benefits shall accrue one year 
earlier. The fourth sentence of section 18(1) of this Act shall apply, mutatis mutandis .  
Section 20  
Amount of superannuation benefits  
Superannuation benefi ts shall be calculated on the basis of Members’ monthly remuneration 
(section 11(1) of this Act). From 1 January 2008, the rate of increase shall be two and a half 
per cent of the Members’ remuneration specified in section 11(1) for each year of 
membership . The maximum rate at which superannuation benefits are payable shall be 65 
per cent. Time spent in office as President and/or one of his or her deputies shall form the 
basis for the calculation of superannuation benefits pursuant to the first two sentence s 
above, the supplementary allowance being added to the Members’ remuneration specified in 
section 11(1). The fourth sentence of section 18(1) shall apply, mutatis mutandis . 
 
Until the date of the first sitting of the 19th Bundestag, the following version applied:  
Section 20  
Amount of superannuation benefits  
Superannuation benefits shall be calculated on the basis of Members’ monthly remuneration 
(section 11(1) of this Act). From 1 January 2008, the rate of increase shall be two and a half 
per cent of the M embers’ remuneration specified in section 11(1) for each year of 
membership. The maximum rate at which superannuation benefits are payable shall be 67.5 
per cent. Time spent in office as President and/or one of his or her deputies shall form the 
basis for the calculation of superannuation benefits pursuant to the first two sentences 
above, the supplementary allowance being added to the Members’ remuneration specified in 
section 11(1). The fourth sentence of section 18(1) shall apply, mutatis mutandis .  
Sect ion 21  
Reckonability of periods in other Parliaments  
(1) On application, periods of service in the Parliament of a constituent state ( Land ) of the 
Federal Republic of Germany shall be regarded as periods of membership within the 
meaning of section 19 of th is Act. If the conditions for entitlement under this Act are thereby 
fulfilled, superannuation benefits shall be paid.  
(2) With regard to the amount of superannuation benefits, the provisions of section 20 shall 
apply, mutatis mutandis , to each year of act ual membership of the Bundestag.  
(3) Subject to the submission of an application to the President of the Bundestag by 30 June 
1996 (exclusion deadline), periods of membership of the People’s Chamber ( Volkskammer ) 
of the former German Democratic Republic fr om the date of acceptance of a mandate after 
the elections to the Volkskammer for its tenth legislative term until 2 October 1990 shall be 
regarded as periods of membership of the Bundestag. The fourth sentence of section 18(1) 
shall apply, mutatis mutandi s.  In the case of an application made under the first sentence 
above in which a period of membership of the Volkskammer is indicated, the application Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 10 of 37 shall be processed retroactively as regards pension expectancy and entitlements accruing 
during that peri od of membership.  
Section 22  
Damage to health  
(1) If a Member suffered damage to his or her health when serving in the Bundestag, except 
through his or her own gross negligence, and if the Member’s ability to work is thereby 
permanently and seriously impai red to the extent that that he or she can no longer fulfil his or 
her mandate or, on leaving the Bundestag, return to the occupation which he or she had 
before election to the Bundestag or engage in any other reasonable occupation, he or she 
shall, on appl ication and irrespective of the conditions set out in section 19 of this Act, 
receive superannuation benefits with effect from the month in which the application is made; 
the amount of these benefits shall be calculated in accordance with section 20 but sh all be 
no less than 30 per cent of the remuneration payable under section 11(1). If the damage to 
the Member’s health is the result of an accident, the assessment basis described in section 
20 shall be increased by 20 per cent but shall not exceed the maxi mum rate for the payment 
of superannuation benefits.  
(2) If a former Member of the Bundestag who, irrespective of age, fulfils the conditions under 
section 19 of this Act with regard to length of service suffers damage to health within the 
meaning of subs ection (1) above, he or she shall receive superannuation benefits, the 
amount of which shall be determined in accordance with section 20.  
(3) The damage to health must be substantiated by a report from a medical institution 
governed by public law. This re port shall be superseded by a notice of award in respect of a 
pension for reduction of earning capacity, occupational disability or incapacity for 
employment or by a notice of invalidity as defined in civil -service law.  
Section 23  
Compensatory severance p ayment  
(1) A Member who, on leaving the Bundestag, has acquired neither expectancy rights nor 
entitlement to superannuation benefits under sections 19 to 22 of this Act shall, on 
application, receive a compensatory severance payment for the period of his o r her 
membership of the Bundestag. It shall be paid in respect of each month of membership of 
the Bundestag commenced and shall be equal in amount to the maximum contribution to the 
general pension scheme in each of the months in question plus twenty per c ent of the said 
maximum contribution.  
(2) Instead of the severance payment, Members who fulfil the conditions defined in 
subsection (1) above may also apply to buy in the period of their membership of the 
Bundestag in implementation, mutatis mutandis , of t he provisions of the Sixth Book of the 
German Social Code ( Sozialgesetzbuch ) relating to retroactive insurance.  
(3) Subsection (2) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to supplementary retirement and 
surviving dependants’ pensions.  
(4) Subsection (2) shal l not apply if and in so far as the period of membership of the 
Bundestag has been accounted for or will be accounted for under an insurance scheme 
governed by public law or in a pension awarded on the basis of service regulations.  
(5) Instead of the sever ance payment referred to in subsection (1) above, the period of 
membership of the Bundestag may, on application, be counted as a period of reckonable 
service within the meaning of the legislation governing the pay and pensions of civil 
servants, judges and  members of the armed forces.  
(6) If a Member has made an application under subsections (1) to (3) or subsection (5) 
above, the accumulation of the qualifying periods of membership specified in section 19 of 
this Act shall be resumed in the event of his or  her re -entering the Bundestag.  
(7) If a former Member dies without having made an application for a compensatory 
severance payment, his or her surviving spouse or, if there is no surviving spouse, his or her Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 11 of 37 natural or adopted children may make an applica tion in accordance with  subsection (1) 
above.       
(8) Subsections (2) and (4) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to an outgoing Member of 
the Parliament of a Land if the legislation of the Land provides for a compensatory 
severance payment within the meaning of subsection (1) above.  
(9) If a Member of a Land  Parliament loses his or her membership but has no entitlement or 
accrued rights to a lump -sum payment or regular pension benefits in respect of his or her 
period of membership, subsections (2) and (4) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis .  
Section 24  
Transitional allowance for surviving dependants  
(1) The surviving dependants of a Member of the Bundestag shall receive the payments 
provided for by this Act but not yet disbursed, on condition that they  were due at the time of 
death. The surviving spouse, civil partner and offspring shall receive a transitional allowance 
equal to the amount of Members’ remuneration payable under section 11(1) of this Act. The 
transitional allowance shall amount to one an d a half times the Members’ remuneration 
payable under section 11(1) in cases where the deceased was a Member for more than 
eight years or more than two electoral terms. If there are no surviving dependants within the 
meaning of the second sentence above, the transitional allowance shall be granted to other 
persons who bore the costs arising from the final illness, up to the amount of the expenditure 
they incurred. The amount of transitional allowance payable shall be reduced by 1,050 euros 
with effect from  31 March 2004.  
(2) The same shall apply in the event of the death of a former Member of the Bundestag who 
fulfils the conditions relating to duration of membership under section 19 of this Act and was 
not yet receiving superannuation benefits at the time  of death.  
Section 25  
Surviving dependants’ pension  
(1) The surviving spouse or civil partner of a Member or former Member of the Bundestag 
shall receive sixty per cent of the appropriate superannuation benefits, provided the 
deceased was entitled to supe rannuation benefits at the time of death or fulfilled the 
conditions for the award of superannuation benefits.  
(2) The surviving spouse or civil partner of a Member or former Member of the Bundestag, 
who, irrespective of age, fulfilled the conditions rela ting to duration of membership under 
section 19 of this Act shall receive sixty per cent of the superannuation benefits, the amount 
of which shall be determined in accordance with section 20.  
(3) The natural and adopted children of a former Member who woul d have received 
superannuation benefits at the time of his or her death, or of a deceased Member or a 
deceased recipient of superannuation benefits, shall each receive an orphan’s pension. If the 
children are orphans, the pension shall amount to twenty per  cent of the superannuation 
benefits referred to in subsections (1) and (2) above; if they still have one parent, the 
children shall receive an orphan’s pension amounting to twelve per cent of the said benefits.  
(4) In the event of the death of a Member o f the Bundestag who has belonged to the 
Bundestag for less than fourteen years, the surviving spouse shall receive sixty per cent, 
each orphan twenty per cent and each child with one surviving parent twelve per cent of the 
superannuation benefits payable t o a Member with thirteen years’ reckonable service.  
Section 25a  
Pension -rights adjustment  
(1) Expectancy rights for each benefit scheme shall be divided between spouses in the event 
of divorce.  
(2) Implementation shall be governed by the Act concerning the  Scheme -based Sharing of 
Entitlements in Civil -service Pensions Law Accruing to Federal Civil Servants under Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 12 of 37 Statutory Adjustment of Pension Rights (Federal Statutory Pension -sharing Act – 
Bundesversorgungsteilungsgesetz ), mutatis mutandis .   
(3) The asses sment of superannuation benefits shall be effected in accordance with section 
39 of the Pension Rights Adjustment Act ( Versorgungsausgleichgesetz ).  
Section 25b  
Cost-saving measures with regard to pension entitlements  
(1) In the conditions described in sec tion 25 of this Act, the surviving spouse or civil partner 
shall receive fifty -five per cent of the relevant superannuation benefits. This shall not apply in 
the case of couples married or civil partnerships entered into prior to 28 December 2004 if at 
least one of the spouses or civil partners had reached his or her fortieth birthday on or before 
that date.  
(2) In the case of persons with an entitlement under section 27(1) of this Act, benefits 
payable under sections 18, 19, 21, 22 and 25 shall be reduced  by the half percentage point 
of annual income referred to in the first sentence of section 55(1) of the Eleventh Book of the 
Social Code or by the half percentage point of the income ceiling for the assessment of 
contributions to nursing -care insurance (s ection 55(2) of the Eleventh Book of the Social 
Code) referred to in the first sentence of section 55(1) of the Eleventh Book of the Social 
Code, whichever is the lesser.  
(3) With effect from the first adjustment to Members’ remuneration under section 11( 1) of this 
Act after 28 December 2004, the assessment rate used in the calculation of superannuation 
benefits accruing up to 31 December 2007 shall be reduced by half a percentage point for 
each year of membership up to and including the fourth adjustment.   
(4) With effect from the first adjustment to the notional assessment figure for superannuation 
benefits under the third sentence of section 35a(2) of this Act, the assessment rate used 
pursuant to section 20 in the calculation of superannuation benefits payable under Parts Five 
and Nine of this Act as amended prior to 22 December 1995 shall be reduced by half a 
percentage point for each year of membership up to and including the eighth adjustment.  
(5) For Members who belong to the Bundestag in the 16th a nd/or subsequent electoral 
terms, section 29(3) shall also apply, mutatis mutandis , to private earned income until they 
reach the age specified in section 19(1) or (2), as appropriate.   
Section 26  
Application of civil -service regulations  
Without prejudice  to any contrary provision contained in this Act, the provisions of  pensions 
legislation relating to federal civil servants shall be applied, mutatis mutandis . Section 53(8) 
of the Civil Service Benefits Act ( Beamtenversorgungsgesetz ) shall apply, mutatis  mutandis , 
to the concept of employment in the public service within the meaning of the present section.  
PART SIX  
Subsidisation of costs in the event of illness, nursing care and births; assistance  
Section 27  
Subsidisation of costs in the event of illness,  nursing care and births  
(1) Members of the Bundestag shall receive a grant towards necessary costs incurred as a 
result of illness, nursing care and births in application, mutatis mutandis , of the provisions 
applicable to federal civil servants. This shal l also apply to recipients of pensions awarded 
under this Act, provided that they do not have a right to claim assistance on the basis of a 
contract of employment or membership of another legislative body and that the right to make 
such a claim against the  Bundestag under this Act has not been waived in writing.  
(2) Instead of the entitlement to a grant under subsection (1) above, Members and recipients 
of pensions shall receive a subsidy towards their health -insurance contributions if their 
employer does n ot make contributions pursuant to Section 249 of the Fifth Book of the Social 
Code or if there is no entitlement to a contribution subsidy under section 257 of the Fifth Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 13 of 37 Book of the Social Code. Members of the statutory health -insurance scheme who receive a 
pension from the statutory pensions scheme and who either pay only half of the health -
insurance contribution pursuant to section 249a of the Fifth Book of the Social Code or who 
receive a contribution subsidy pursuant to section 106 of the Sixth Book of the Social Code 
shall not receive a subsidy towards this pension -related health -insurance contribution. The 
subsidy shall be half of the health -insurance contribution paid from the individual’s own 
means, by analogy with section 249 of the Fifth Book of th e Social Code. For those not 
insured exclusively by a statutory health -insurance fund as defined in section 4 of the Fifth 
Book of the Social Code, the maximum amount of the subsidy shall be half of the amount 
specified in section 249 of the Fifth Book of the Social Code.  
(3) The entitlement to the subsidy towards health -insurance contributions under subsection 
(2) above shall include, for Members of the Bundestag, entitlement to a subsidy amounting 
to half of the contributions to private nursing -care insur ance paid from an individual’s own 
means or half of the maximum contribution to the state nursing -care insurance scheme, 
whichever is the lesser. The subsidy shall not include the contribution supplement for 
childless persons prescribed by section 55 of th e Eleventh Book of the Social Code.  
(4) The decision as to whether the Member wishes to claim the subsidy under subsection (2) 
above instead of the benefits under subsection (1) must be notified to the President of the 
Bundestag within four months from th e date on which the election result was established by 
the Federal Electoral Committee (first sentence of section 42(2) of the Federal Electoral Act 
(Bundeswahlgesetz )), or on which a permanent civil servant accepted his or her mandate; 
the decision shall be irrevocable for the duration of the electoral term. Recipients of pensions 
must inform the President of their decision within four months of notification of the pension 
award; they shall remain bound by their decision.  
Section 28  
Assistance  
In special c ases, the President may grant assistance in the form of a single lump sum to a 
Member of the Bundestag and assistance in the form of a single lump sum or a regular 
maintenance allowance to a former Member and his or her surviving dependants.  
PART SEVEN  
Reckonability of concurrent benefits  from public funds  
Section 29  
Reckonability of concurrent benefits from public funds  
(1) If a Member of the Bundestag, in addition to the remuneration referred to in section 11 of 
this Act, is also entitled to receive incom e in respect of the tenure of public office or from 
employment in the public service, the remuneration payable under section 11 shall be 
reduced by fifty per cent; the amount of the reduction may not, however, exceed thirty per 
cent of the said income. The  same shall apply to income from the tenure of public office or 
from employment in the public service with an intergovernmental or international institution. 
The Member’s remuneration shall be suspended in full where there is a concurrent 
entitlement to re muneration under the act of a Land  concerning the legal status of Members 
of its Parliament. The payments referred to in the second and third sentences above shall 
not be reckonable if the legislation of the relevant Land  or the rules of the relevant 
intergovernmental or international institution already provide for deduction in respect of the 
income or suspension of remuneration payable for exercising a mandate in the Land  
Parliament.  
(2) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to Members’ remuneration und er section 11(1) of 
the present Act, pension benefits to which a Member is entitled by virtue of the tenure of 
public office or employment in the public service shall be partially suspended, the suspended 
entitlement corresponding to eighty per cent of the  said pension benefits or the amount of 
remuneration payable under section 11(1) and (3), whichever is the lesser. The same shall Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 14 of 37 apply, mutatis mutandis , to fifty per cent of the amount of pensions within the meaning of the 
second sentence of section 55(1 ) of the Civil Service Benefits Act 
(Beamtenversorgungsgesetz ), with the exception of pensions from a compulsory insurance 
scheme if payable to an exempted person who opted into the scheme on application 
pursuant to section 4(2) of Book Six of the Social C ode; section 55(3) and (4) of the Civil 
Service Benefits Act shall be applied, mutatis mutandis . The transitional emoluments 
payable under the Federal Ministers Act ( Gesetz über die Rechtsverhältnisse der Mitglieder 
der Bundesregierung ) and the Parliamenta ry State Secretaries Act (Gesetz über die 
Rechtsverhältnisse der Parlamentarischen Staatssekretäre) which remain after the 
application of the other provisions on the reckonability and suspension of benefits shall be 
suspended from the second month after de parture from office if there is a concurrent 
entitlement to Members’ remuneration under section 11. If entitlement to a pension as 
defined in the first or second sentences above is founded on the law of a Land , the 
suspension of the pension entitlement sha ll be superseded by the suspension of an amount 
of Members’ remuneration to be determined on the basis of the first or second sentence 
above. The same shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to pension entitlements deriving from the 
tenure of office or from employm ent in the public service with an intergovernmental  or 
international institution.  
(3) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to income from the tenure of public office or from 
employment in the public service, entitlement to pension benefits under this Ac t shall be 
partially suspended, the suspended entitlement corresponding to fifty per cent of the amount 
by which the pension entitlements plus the income exceed the amount of Members’ 
remuneration payable under section 11(1) of this Act. The same shall app ly, mutatis 
mutandis , to income from the tenure of public office or employment in the public service with 
an intergovernmental or international institution.  
(4) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to pension benefits arising from the tenure of 
public o ffice or from employment in the public service, entitlement to pension benefits under 
the present Act shall be partially suspended, the suspended entitlement corresponding to 
fifty per cent of the amount by which the pension benefits under the present Act plus those 
arising from the tenure of public office or from employment in the public service exceed the 
amount of Members’ remuneration payable under Section 11(1) of the present Act. The 
same shall apply, mutatis mutandis , in the case of the receipt of a pension arising from the 
tenure of public office or employment in the public service with an intergovernmental or 
international institution. Pensions within the meaning of the second sentence of section 55(1) 
of the Civil Service Benefits Act ( Beamtenverso rgungsgesetz ) shall be set off in the same 
way, with the exception of pensions from a compulsory insurance scheme if payable to an 
exempted person who opted into the scheme on application pursuant to section 4(2) of Book 
Six of the Social Code; the fourth and fifth sentences of section 55(1), as well as subsections 
(3), (4) and (8), of the Civil Service Benefits Act shall apply, mutatis mutandis . 
(5) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to remuneration arising from membership of the 
Bundestag, of the Eur opean Parliament or of the Parliament of a Land , entitlement to 
pension benefits under this Act shall be partially suspended, the suspended entitlement 
corresponding to the amount by which this remuneration exceeds the Members’ 
remuneration payable under S ection 11(1) of this Act.  
(6) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to pension benefits arising from membership of 
the Bundestag or of the Parliament of a Land , entitlement to pension benefits under this Act 
shall be partially suspended, the suspended en titlement corresponding to the amount by 
which the latter benefits exceed the maximum pension benefits payable under this Act. 
Where there is a concurrent entitlement to pension benefits arising from membership of the 
European Parliament, entitlement to pe nsion benefits under this Act shall be partially 
suspended, the suspended entitlement corresponding to the amount of the European 
Parliament pension, unless the European Parliament has already specified that the pension 
benefits payable under this Act are to be set off against its own pensions.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 15 of 37 (7) Except in the case of the pensions referred to in the third sentence of subsection (4) 
above, only the non -contributory element of pension benefits shall be reckonable. 
Subsections (1) to (4) shall not apply to p ayments made on the basis of rules governing 
annual payments under the legislation of a Land  or collective agreements. In the application 
of subsections (1) to (4) above, expense allowances, accident compensation, holiday pay 
and non -recurring payments sha ll be disregarded.  
(8) In the assessment of the reckonability ceilings defined in subsections (3) to (6) above, 
due account shall be taken of the supplementary allowance referred to in section 11(2) of 
this Act.  
(9) Employment in the public service and the  intergovernmental or international institutions 
referred to in the present provision shall be defined in accordance with section 53(8) of the 
Civil Service Benefits Act and the provisions enacted in connection therewith.  
PART EIGHT  
General provisions  
Sect ion 30  
(repealed)  
Section 31  
Waiver; transferability  
A waiver of the Members’ remuneration referred to in section 11 of this Act and the benefits 
referred to in section 12 and in Part Five, with the exception of section 18, is not permissible. 
The entitlem ents deriving from section 12 are not transferable. No more than half of the 
entitlement to Members’ remuneration under section 11 is transferable. In all other respects, 
the provisions of sections 850 et seq.  of the Code of Civil Procedure ( Zivilprozessor dnung ) 
shall apply.  
Section 32  
Commencement and expiry of entitlements; payment provisions  
 (1) The entitlements established by sections 11, 12, 16, 27 and 28 of this Act shall take 
effect from the date on which the Federal Electoral Committee establishes the result of the 
election (first sentence of section 42(2) of the Federal Electoral Act) or, in the case described 
in section 45(3) of the Federal Electoral Act, from the date on which the Member accepts his 
or her mandate, even if the electoral term of t he previous Bundestag has not yet expired. 
Expenditure related to the exercise of a mandate which an elected constituency candidate or 
a candidate elected from an electoral list in a Land  incurs between the election date and the 
date on which the Federal E lectoral Committee establishes the result of the election (first 
sentence of section 42(2) of the Federal Electoral Act) or, in the case described in section 
45(3) of the Federal Electoral Act, from the date on which the Member accepts his or her 
mandate i n connection with the assembly of the new Bundestag shall also be reimbursed.    
(2) Outgoing Members shall receive the Members’ remuneration payable under section 11 of 
this Act until the end of the month of severance and the monetary benefits referred to  in 
section 12(2) until the end of the following month. Entitlements under section 16 shall expire 
fourteen days after the date of severance from the Bundestag.  
(3) Reimbursement for the employment of staff shall be paid up to the end of the  month in 
which the electoral term expires. If a Member leaves the Bundestag during the electoral 
term, expenditure on the employment of staff shall be reimbursed until the end of the fifth 
month after the date of severance at the latest, unless the employment is termin ated at an 
earlier date.  
(4) Superannuation benefits shall be awarded from the first day of the month following the 
event giving rise to the entitlement until the end of the month in which the entitled person 
dies.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 16 of 37 (5) Entitlement to superannuation benefit s shall be suspended during the period of 
entitlement to transitional allowance.  
(6) Superannuation benefits under this Act shall not be paid if the Member or former Member 
loses or would lose his or her membership of the Bundestag on the basis of Section 15(2)(2) 
of the Federal Electoral Act. Section 23 of the present Act shall apply for the period of 
membership of the Bundestag.  
(7) With regard to Members who leave the Bundestag after this Act has come into force, 
section 27 of this Act shall apply for t he period of their entitlement to a transitional allowance 
under section 18 or six mon ths, whichever is the greater.  
(8) The Members’ remuneration payable under section 11 and the monetary benefits 
payable under section 12(2) and sections 20 to 27 shall be  paid monthly in advance. If they 
are only payable in part, one thirtieth shall be paid for each calendar day.  
Section 33  
(repealed)  
Section 34  
Implementing provisions  
(1) Provided federal legislation empowers it to do so, the Council of Elders may issue 
implementing provisions relating to the legal status of Members of the Bundestag which shall 
be published by the President.  
(2) The Council of Elders may issue general administrative provisions relating to this Act.  
(3) The President shall publish the amoun t of the expense allowance.  
PART NINE  
Transitional provisions  
Section 35  
Transitional provisions in respect of the Eleventh Act Amending the Act on the Legal 
Status of Members of the Bundestag  
(1) The present Act shall apply without prejudice to pension en titlements and expectancy 
rights  predating the entry into force of the Eleventh Amendment Act. Section 29(4) of the 
present Act shall apply. The first and second sentences above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , 
to surviving dependants of a recipient of supe rannuation benefits if the latter dies after the 
entry into force of the  Eleventh Amendment Act.  
(2) Pension entitlements and expectancy rights of former Members of the Bundestag who 
fulfilled the conditions relating to duration of membership prior to th e entry into force of the 
Eleventh Amendment Act and those of their surviving dependants shall be governed by the 
law hitherto in force. Section 29(4) of the present Act shall apply. The first and second 
sentences above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to Me mbers of the Bundestag who belong to 
the Bundestag or to the Parliament of a Land  prior to the entry into force of the Eleventh 
Amendment Act as well as to their surviving dependants.  
(3) Former Members of the Bundestag who re -enter the Bundestag after the  entry into force 
of the Eleventh Amendment Act and who fulfil the conditions set out in sections 19 and 21 of 
the present Act prior to the amendment shall receive superannuation benefits under the law 
hitherto in force, subject to the proviso that four pe r cent of the remuneration referred to in 
section 11(1) shall be awarded for each year of membership after the entry into force of the 
Eleventh Amendment Act until the maximum rate of superannuation benefits is reached. 
Section 29(4) shall apply. The first  and second sentences above shall apply, mutatis 
mutandis , to surviving dependants.  
(4) The pension expectancy arising under subsection (1) to (3) of the law hitherto in force 
shall form the basis of assessment for the pension entitlement if it is higher t han the pension 
expectancy arising under this Act.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 17 of 37 Section 35a  
Transitional provisions in respect of the Nineteenth Amendment Act  
(1) The provisions of Parts Five and Nine of this Act in force up to 22 December 1995 shall 
continue to apply to Members who b elonged to the Bundestag on 22 December 1995, former 
Members of the Bundestag and their surviving dependants. Section 25 b (1), (2) and (5) shall 
apply, mutatis mutandis .  
(2) In those cases referred to in subsection (1) above, a notional assessment figure  shall 
apply instead of the Members’ remuneration payable under section 11 of this Act. The 
assessment figure for transitional emoluments shall be set at 5,301 euros. The notional 
assessment figure for superannuation benefits shall be set at 11,683 Deutsch e Mark with 
effect from 1 July 2000, at 11,868 Deutsche Mark with effect from 1 January 2001, at 6,165 
euros with effect from 1 January 2002, at 6,263 euros with effect from 1 January 2003, at 
6,411 euros with effect from 1 January 2008, at 6,555 euros wit h effect from 1 January 2009, 
at 6,805 euros with effect from 1 January 2012, at 7,055 euros with effect from 1 January 
2013, at 7,410 euros with effect from 1 July 2014 and at 7,765 euros with effect from 1 
January 2015. For subsequent adjustments, the ad justment factor shall be determined on 
the basis of the procedure prescribed in sec tion 11(4) and (5) of this Act.*  
(3) Where section 29 applies to pension entitlements under this Act, the notional assessment 
figure for the superannuation benefits referred  to in subsection (2) above shall also be used 
as a basis in the cases referred to in subsection (1) above instead of the Members’ 
remuneration payable under section 11.  
(4) Members of the thirteenth German Bundestag to whom subsection (1) above applies ma y 
opt for the provisions of Part Five, as amended by the Nineteenth Amendment Act, to be 
applied until their retirement from the Bundestag. This decision shall be binding. In the event 
that a Member dies prior to exercising his or her option, the more favo urable version shall 
apply.  
 
Footnote * : With effect from 1 July 2021 the notional assessment figure amounts to 
8,560.90 euros (Bundestag printed paper 19/28929 of 26 April 2021).  
Section 35b  
Transitional provisions in respect of the Twenty -seventh Amendme nt Act  
(1) The provisions of Parts Five and Nine of this Act in force up to 31 December 2007 shall 
apply to entitlements and expectancy rights accruing to  Members of the Bundestag, former 
Members of the Bundestag and their surviving dependants up to 31 De cember 2007. Section 
19(1) and (2), the third sentence of section 20 and section 25b(3) shall apply , mutatis 
mutandis . 
(2) In those cases referred to in subsection (1) above, a separate notional assessment figure 
shall apply instead of the Members’ remuner ation payable under section 11 of this Act. This 
notional assessment figure shall be set at 7,174 euros with effect from 1 January 2008, at 
7,335 euros with effect from 1 January 2009, at 7,615 euros with effect from 1 January 2012, 
at 7,895 euros with eff ect from 1 January 2013, at 8,292 euros with effect from 1 July 2014 
and at 8,689 euros with effect from 1 January 2015. The foregoing provisions shall be 
without prejudice to section 35a. For subsequent adjustments, the adjustment factor shall be 
determin ed on the basis of the procedure prescribed in sec tion 11(4) and (5) of this Act.*  
(3) The minimum period prescribed in section 19 of this Act as amended prior to the entry 
into force of the Twenty -seventh Amendment Act shall not apply to the assessment of  
entitlements and expectancy rights of Members of the 16th Bundestag under subsection (1) 
above.  
(4) Where section 29 applies to pension entitlements under this Act, the notional assessment 
figure for the superannuation benefits referred to in subsection ( 2) above shall also be 
applied in the cases referred to in subsection (1) above instead of the Members’ 
remuneration payable under section 11. In cases in which the pension entitlements derive Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 18 of 37 partly from the new legislation and partly from subsection (1) above, these parts shall be 
calculated with due regard to the figures obtained by applying the respective percentage 
ratios with which pensions are calculated on the basis of the notional assessment figure 
prescribed in subsection (2) above and the remuner ation prescribed by section 11.  
 
Footnote * : With effect from 1 July 2021 the notional assessment figure amounts to 
9,579.60 euros (Bundestag printed paper 19/28929 of 26 April 2021).  
 
Section 35c  
Transitional provisions in respect of the Thirtieth Amendme nt Act  
The provisions of Parts Five and Nine of this Act in force on the day of the first sitting of the 
19th Bundestag shall apply to entitlements and expectancy rights accruing to Members of 
the Bundestag, former Members of the Bundestag and their surviv ing dependants up to the 
date of the first meeting of the 19th Bundestag. The foregoing provision shall be without 
prejudice to sections 35a and 35b of this Act.  
Section 36  
Transitional provisions for public servants  
(1) A civil servant who has retired on  the basis of the Act of 11 May 1951 on the Legal Status 
of Public Servants Elected to the First German Bundestag ( Gesetz über die Rechtsstellung 
der in den ersten Deutschen Bundestag gewählten Angehörigen des öffentlichen Dienstes  - 
Federal Law Gazette I,  p. 297) or on the basis of the Act of 4 August 1953 on the Legal 
Status of Public Servants Elected to the German Bundestag ( Gesetz über die Rechtsstellung 
der in den Deutschen Bundestag gewählten Angehörigen des öffentlichen Dienstes  - Federal 
Law Gazette  I, p. 777), as amended by the Act of 21 August 1961 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 
1557) or on the basis of corresponding legislation of a Land  and who was elected to the 
eighth Bundestag or to a later Bundestag, shall be regarded as having been re -appointed as 
a civil servant on simultaneous suspension of his or her rights and duties (section 5(1) of the 
present Act) with effect from the date of acceptance of election or from the date of entry into 
force of the present Act, whichever is the later, provided th at he or she still fulfils the general 
conditions for appointment as a civil servant. In all other respects, the entitlements accruing, 
prior to the entry into force of the present Act, under section 4 and the last sentence of 
section 4a of the Act of 4 Au gust 1953 on the Legal Status of Public Servants elected to the 
German Bundestag shall be preserved.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to judges, to career members and 
fixed-term volunteer members of the armed forces and to public -service employees.  
(3) In the case of former Members of the Bundestag, entitlements accruing under the Act of 
4 August 1953 on the Legal Status of Public Servants elected to the German Bundestag 
shall be preserved.  
Section 37  
Pensions for Members who retired  prior to 1968  
On application, the President shall award superannuation benefits and a surviving 
dependants’ pensions, pursuant to the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ), dated 3 May 1968 (Federal Law Gazett e I, p. 334), as 
amended by Article VIII of the Act of 18 February 1977 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 297), to a 
former Member who retired from the Bundestag prior to 1 January 1968 and to his or her 
surviving dependants with effect from the first day of the month of application.  
Section 38  
Pensions for periods prior to the entry into force of this Act  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 19 of 37 (1) A Member of the Bundestag who leaves during the period between 1 January 1968 and 
the date of entry into force of the present Act and his or her surviving d ependants shall 
receive a pension under the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 
1968.  
(2) A Member of the Bundestag who belonged to the Bundestag prior to the date of entry into 
force of this Act and did not leave the Bundestag until  after that date shall receive 
superannuation benefits in accordance with this Act; his or her membership prior to the entry 
into force of this Act shall be reckonable service for the assessment of these benefits.  
(3) Instead of the superannuation benefits  awardable under subsection (2) above, the 
individual’s own contributions to superannuation benefits and the surviving dependants’ 
pension under section 4 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) shall be r eimbursed on application without payment of 
interest. In the latter case, periods of membership of the Bundestag prior to the entry into 
force of the present Act shall not be taken into consideration in the determination of the 
superannuation benefits paya ble under this Act. In the cases described in section 23 of this 
Act, only half of the compensatory severance payment shall be awarded.  
(4) Instead of the superannuation benefits awardable under subsection (2) above, a Member 
of the Bundestag who fulfils the conditions of section 5(1) and section 7a(1) of the Act 
governing the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 shall receive, on 
application, a retirement pension under the said Act for the period of membership of the 
Bundestag prior to the entry into force of the present Act; for the period after the entry into 
force of the present Act came into force, superannuation benefits under this Act shall be 
awarded, subject to the proviso that five per cent of the Members’ remuneration under 
section 11(1)  is paid for each year of membership. The qualifying periods before and after 
the entry into force of this Act may not exceed sixteen years. The same shall apply in respect 
of surviving dependants.  
(5) The application referred to in subsections (3) and (4)  above must be made to the 
President of the Bundestag within six months from the entry into force of this Act.  
Section 38a  
(1) On application, recipients of pensions awarded under sections 37 and 38(1) of this Act 
shall receive a pension in accordance with  Part Five instead of their current pension. The 
same applies to former Members who belonged to the Bundestag for at least six years 
before the entry into force of this Act and their surviving dependants. The last sentence of 
section 18(1) shall apply, mutatis mutandis . 
(2) Section 38(4) shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to former Members who left the Bundestag 
prior to 1 April 1977 and subsequently re -entered. The application must be made to the 
President of the Bundestag within six months from the date of re -entry into the German 
Bundestag. The same shall apply in respect of surviving dependants.  
Section 38b  
Surviving dependants’ pension in the event of the death of a   serving Member of the 
Bundestag  
On application, surviving dependants as defined in section 25(4) of the present Act whose 
insured event occurred during the period between 1 April 1977 and the date of entry into 
force of the Seventh Amendment Act shall receive a pension under section 25(4) of the 
present Act with effect from the first day of the month of application.  
Section 39  
Reckonability of previous pension benefits  
(1) In accordance with section 10 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ), pension benefits payable under that Act shall not be 
reckonable benefits for the purposes of section 29(3) and (4) of the present Act.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 20 of 37 (2) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to remuneration or a pension arising from 
membership of the Parliament of a Land  (section 29(5) and (6) of the present Act), only t he 
non-contributory element of pension benefits payable under the Act governing the 
Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 shall be reckonable. Periods credited 
under section 21 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 
shall be regarded as contribution periods.  
Section 40  
Reduced compensatory severance payment  
For periods of membership to which the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) applies, half of the compensatory severa nce payment 
under section 23 of the present Act shall be awarded. In this case, the Member’s own 
insurance contributions under section 4 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members 
of the Bundestag 1968 shall be reimbursed on application.  
Section 41  
Continuation of life assurance  
Life-assurance policies in existence on the entry into force of this Act shall be continued, 
subject to reduction of superannuation benefits and widow’s or widower’s pension in 
accordance with the number and amount of monthly contributions made by the policyholder 
to the life -assurance fund since 1 January 1968.  
Section 42  
Conversion or cancellation of life assurance  
(1) A Member or former Member of the Bundestag who has opted for the continuation of 
insurance at the expense of  the Federal Republic under section 20 of the Act governing the 
Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) may convert or 
cancel the life -assurance policy.  
(2) In the case of conversion, there is the option of continuation at the ind ividual’s own 
expense or of non -contributory insurance, subject to reduction of superannuation benefits 
and widow’s or widower’s pension in accordance with the number and amount of monthly 
contributions made by the policyholder to the life -assurance fund f rom 1 January 1968 until 
the end of the month in which the policy was converted or until the award of superannuation 
benefits.  
(3) In the event of cancellation of the insurance policy, the insured person shall be 
reimbursed with the redemption value based on his or her own contributions.  
Section 43  
Continued payment of transitional emoluments  
A former Member of the Bundestag receiving Members’ allowances under the Act governing 
the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) at the tim e of 
entry into force of the present Act shall retain this entitlement.  
Section 44  
Reckonable service for transitional emoluments  
Periods of Membership of the Bundestag prior to the entry into force of this Act shall count 
towards the period for which tran sitional emoluments are payable.  
PART TEN  
Independence of Members of the Bundestag  
Section 44a  
Independence of the mandate  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 21 of 37 (1) The exercise of the mandate of a Member of the Bundestag shall be central to his or her 
activity. Without prejudice to this oblig ation, activities of a professional or other nature 
alongside the exercise of the mandate are permissible in principle.  
(2) For the exercise of his or her mandate, a Member of the Bundestag may not accept any 
consideration besides those for which the law p rovides or any other pecuniary benefit. In 
particular, it is inadmissible to accept money or gifts with monetary value which are 
recognisably only granted in the expectation that the interests of the payer will be 
represented and asserted in the Bundestag.  It is also inadmissible for a Member of the 
Bundestag to accept money or gifts with monetary value if that benefit is granted for lecturing 
in connection with the exercise of the Member’s mandate or if he or she does not render an 
appropriate service in r eturn. The foregoing provisions shall be without prejudice to the 
receipt of gifts with monetary value in the circumstances defined in section 48 of this Act. 
The receipt of donations that are intended to remain in the Member’s possession is 
inadmissible.  
(3) It is inadmissible to combine a mandate with the remunerated representation of third -
party interests vis -à-vis the Bundestag or the Federal Government or to engage in 
remunerated consultancy activities that are directly connected with the exercise of a 
mandate. This shall not apply to any voluntary activity for which provision has been made for 
a proportionate expenses allowance not exceeding ten per cent of the monthly remuneration 
specified in section 11(1) of this Act or to political offices. Agreem ents whereby a Member of 
the Bundestag does not receive considerations or any other pecuniary benefits for having 
represented interests or engaged in consultancy activities within the meaning of the first 
sentence above as a Member of the Bundestag until a fter the loss of his or her membership 
are inadmissible.  
(4) Improper references to membership of the Bundestag in    professional or business 
matters are inadmissible. References to membership of the Bundestag are improper if they 
are liable to create an advantage in professional or business matters by reason of that 
membership of the Bundestag.  
(5) Considerations or pecuniary benefits which are inadmissible under paragraphs 2 to 4 
above or their monetary equivalent shall be payable to the federal budget.  The President 
shall assert this entitlement by means of an administrative act, provided that a period of 
three years has not elapsed since the receipt of the consideration or pecuniary benefit. Loss 
of membership of the Bundestag shall not affect this ent itlement.  
Section 44b  
(repealed)  
Section 44c  
Screening for activity or political responsibilityfor the Ministry of State Security/Office 
ofNational Security of the former German Democratic Republic  
(1) Members of the Bundestag may apply to the President in  writing for screening measures 
to establish whether or not they were full -time employees or unofficial assistants or exercised 
political responsibility for the State Security Service of the former German Democratic 
Republic.  
(2) Screening may take place w ithout consent if the Committee on the Scrutiny of Elections, 
Immunity and the Rules of Procedure has established the existence of concrete grounds for 
suspecting such activity or responsibility.  
(3) In cases referred to in subsections (1) and (2) above, t he procedure shall be conducted 
by the Committee on the Scrutiny of Elections, Immunity and the Rules of Procedure.  
(4) The German Bundestag shall compile guidelines prescribing the procedure for 
establishing whether or not Members were employed by, or exe rcised responsibility for, the 
Ministry of State Security/Office of National Security of the former German Democratic 
Republic.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 22 of 37 Section 44d  
Duty of confidentiality and authority to make a statement  
(1) Even after the end of their term of office, Members of  the German Bundestag may not 
testify or make a statement without consent, either in or out of court, in relation to matters 
which are confidential under statutory provisions or under the Rules of Procedure of the 
German Bundestag.  
(2) The President of the  German Bundestag shall be responsible for granting consent. If 
authorities outside the German Bundestag have been involved in originating the matter 
which is to be kept confidential, consent may be granted only with their agreement.  
(3) Consent may only be refused if the testimony or statement would adversely affect the 
welfare of the Federal Republic or a Land  or would seriously jeopardise or substantially 
impair the performance of public duties.  
Section 44e  
Disciplinary measures against Members  
(1) In t he case of a non -minor breach of order or failure to respect the dignity of the 
Bundestag during its sittings, the President may impose a fine of 1,000 euros on a Member 
of the Bundestag. Any repetition shall result in an increase in the fine to 2,000 euro s. In the 
case of a serious breach of order or failure to respect the dignity of the Bundestag, a 
Member may be ordered to leave the Chamber for the remainder of the sitting and 
suspended from taking part in sittings of the Bundestag and meetings of its bo dies for up to 
30 sitting days. Details shall be regulated in the Rules of Procedure of the Bundestag.  
(2) In the case of a non -minor breach of the internal regulations of the Bundestag, the 
President may impose a fine of 1,000 euros on a Member of the Bun destag. Any repetition 
shall result in an increase in the fine to 2,000 euros; a repetition occurs as a rule if the 
Member in question, within six months, has again given cause for the imposition of a fine on 
account of a non -minor breach of the internal r egulations.  
(3) Jurisdiction over disputes regarding measures and decisions taken under subsections (1) 
and (2) above shall lie with the  Federal Constitutional Court.  
PART ELEVEN  
Code of Conduct for Members of the Bundestag  
Section 45  
Obligation to provid e information  
(1) A Member of the Bundestag shall be obliged, in respect of the period prior to his or her 
membership of the Bundestag, to inform the President in writing of  
1. the occupation he or she last practised and the existence of a right to return to 
that occupation after the end of his or her term of office or of protection under section 2(3) 
of this Act against termination of an employment contract;  
2. activities as member of a board of management, supervisory board, 
administrative board, advisory  board or other body of a company or of an enterprise 
operated in another legal form;  
3. activities as member of a board of management, supervisory board, 
administrative board, advisory board or other body of a corporation or institution under 
public law.  
(2) Moreover, a Member of the Bundestag shall be obliged to inform the President in writing 
of the following activities engaged in or taken up, or contracts binding on him or her, during 
membership of the Bundestag:   
1. remunerated activities engaged in a longside the exercise of his or her office, 
either by virtue of being self -employed or by virtue of being a salaried employee. These Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 23 of 37 include, for example, continuing an occupation engaged in prior to membership of the 
Bundestag, as well as consultancy, rep resentation, the provision of expert opinions, or 
writing or lecturing activities. There shall be no obligation to inform the President of the 
provision of expert opinions or of writing or lecturing activities where the income agreed 
upon does not exceed t he sum of 1,000 euros per month or 3,000 euros per calendar 
year. The same exemption shall apply to activity as a member of the Federal 
Government, as a Parliamentary State Secretary, as a Minister of State, as a Federal 
Government Commissioner or Coordina tor and to parliamentary offices and functions;  
2. activities as member of a board of management, supervisory board, 
administrative board, advisory board or other body of a company or of an enterprise 
operated in another legal form;  
3. activities as membe r of a board of management, supervisory board, 
administrative board, advisory board or other body of a corporation or institution under 
public law;  
4. activities as member of a board of management or other managerial or advisory 
body of a club, association  or similar organisation, or of a foundation of not exclusively 
local importance;  
5. the existence or making of agreements whereby the Member of the Bundestag 
is to be assigned certain activities or receive pecuniary benefits during or after 
membership of the Bundestag;  
6. interests held in private corporations ( Kapitalgesellschaften ) or partnerships 
(Personengesellschaften ), if these amount to a share of more than five per cent, unless 
the activity of the partnerships relates exclusively to letting and le asing in connection with 
the management of private property. In the case of interests held in an investment 
company that must be declared pursuant to the first sentence above, the interests of the 
investment company shall also be declared in so far as they  individually exceed five per 
cent.  
For the year of the Bundestag elections, the period of the electoral term coming to an end 
and that of the new electoral term shall be treated separately.  
(3) In respect of activities or contracts for which an obligatio n to provide information under 
subsection (2), points 1 to 5, above exists, the amount of income derived therefrom shall 
also be declared if it exceeds the amount of 1,000 euros within one month or the amount of 
3,000 euros within one calendar year. The gr anting of options for the allocation of company 
shares or of comparable financial instruments as a consideration for the performance of an 
activity shall be deemed equivalent to income. In the case of interests in private corporations 
or partnerships that are to be declared pursuant to section 45(2)(6) of this Act, the amount of 
income from each is also to be indicated. These amounts shall be based on the gross 
amounts due for the activity, including expenses, compensation and benefits in kind. Where 
the in come comprises sales proceeds, the pre -tax profit shall be indicated instead of the 
gross amounts. Where the value cannot be quantified, this shall also be indicated. Expenses 
actually incurred which are reimbursed by the client or employer for the perform ance of the 
activity shall not be regarded as income.  
(4) The obligation to provide information shall not include the notification of facts concerning 
third parties in respect of whom the Member can invoke a statutory right to refuse to give 
evidence or a  duty not to disclose confidential information. In such cases the economic 
sector concerned is to be indicated rather than details of the client concerned. The obligation 
to indicate the economic sector shall not apply if the Member of the Bundestag declar es that 
an indication of the economic sector would reveal the client’s identity.  
(5) Information provided pursuant to the Code of Conduct must be submitted to the President 
within three months following the acquisition of membership of the German Bundesta g or 
following changes or additions occurring during the electoral term.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 24 of 37 Section 46  
Lawyers  
(1) Members of the Bundestag who, for a fee, represent the Federal Republic of Germany in 
court or out of court shall inform the President of this representation if  the fee exceeds the 
amount of 1,000 euros.  
(2) Members of the Bundestag who, for a fee, represent a third party in court or out of court 
against the Federal Republic of Germany shall inform the President of this representation if 
the fee exceeds the amoun t of 1,000 euros. The foregoing shall be without prejudice to 
section 44a(3) of this Act.  
(3) Paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , in respect of the 
representation of a party in court or out of court, particularly for or against fede ral corporate 
bodies, institutions or foundations under public law.  
Section 47  
Publication  
The information to which compulsory declaration applies under section 45(1), point 1, and (2) 
to (4) shall be published on the Bundestag website. Where the value of the income declared 
pursuant to section 45(3) is not quantifiable, the published information shall include a 
description of the authorised legal position.   
Section 48  
Gifts of pecuniary value (donations)  
(1) A Member of the Bundestag shall keep separate a ccount of all  kinds of gifts of pecuniary 
value (donations) made available to him or her in connection with a voluntary political 
commitment or with assistance in kind rendered by the donor for the Member’s political 
activities. The foregoing shall be wit hout prejudice to the fifth sentence of section 44a(2) of 
this Act.  
(2) A donation the value of which exceeds 1,000 euros in one calendar year shall be notified 
to the President, with the name and address of the donor and the total amount donated 
being st ated.  
(3) Donations the value of which individually or, in the case of several donations from the 
same donor, taken together, exceeds 3,000 euros in one calendar year shall be published by 
the President on the website of the German Bundestag together with an indication of the 
amount and origin.  
(4) In respect of donations to a Member of the Bundestag, section 25(2) and (4) of the 
Political Parties Act ( Parteiengesetz ) shall apply, mutatis mutandis . 
(5) Gifts of pecuniary value received  
1. in connection with  interparliamentary or international activities, or  
2. in connection with participation in events for the purpose of imparting political 
information, presenting the positions of the German Bundestag or of its parliamentary 
groups or representing the Germa n Bundestag  
shall not be deemed to be donations within the meaning of this provision; however, they shall 
be declared in accordance with subsection (2) above and published in accordance with 
subsection (3).  
(6) Gifts of pecuniary value which a Member of t he Bundestag receives as a guest or host in 
connection with his or her mandate shall be notified and handed to the President if the 
material value of the gift exceeds 200 euros. The Member may apply to keep the gift if he or 
she pays the Federal Cash Offic e a sum equivalent to its value.  
(7) The President shall take a decision on the use of declared gifts which Members have 
received as guests as well as of donations unlawfully accepted. These may be auctioned or 
destroyed. If they are auctioned, the proceed s shall be paid into the federal budget.  
(8) Notifications pursuant to this provision shall be made in written or textual form.   Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 25 of 37 Section 49  
Disclosure of interests in committee  
Every Member of the Bundestag in receipt of remuneration for his or her activi ties in 
connection with a subject to be debated in a committee of the Bundestag shall, before 
speaking in the deliberations, disclose as a member of that committee any link between 
these interests and the subject to be debated. Every Member of the Bundesta g who has 
taken over the role of a rapporteur shall declare any specific associated interests prior to the 
deliberations; these declarations shall be noted in the committee’s recommendation for a 
decision.  
Section 50  
Request for further information  
In cas es of doubt the Member of the Bundestag shall be obliged to ascertain, by requesting 
further information from the President, what his or her duties resulting from this Code of 
Conduct are.  
Section 51  
Procedure in the event of contraventions  
(1) If there ar e indications that a Member of the Bundestag has failed to meet his or her 
obligations under section 44(2) to (4) or the Code of Conduct set out in this Part or the rules 
concerning staff employment set out in section 12(3a) of this Act (breach of obligati ons), the 
President may require further information from the Member concerned to explain and clarify 
the situation and may ask the chairperson of the parliamentary group to which the Member 
concerned belongs to state his or her position.  
(2) If, having exa mined the facts, the President believes that the case in question constitutes 
a less serious case, or a case of minor negligence (e.g. exceeding the time limit for declaring 
information by no more than three months), the Member concerned shall receive an 
admonishment. Where this is not the case, the President shall inform the Presidium and the 
chairpersons of the parliamentary groups of the result of the investigation. Having heard the 
Member concerned, the Presidium shall then state whether a breach of obl igations has taken 
place. A statement by the Presidium that a Member of the Bundestag has failed to meet his 
or her obligations shall, notwithstanding further sanctions under section 12(3a) and section 
44a of this Act, be published as a printed paper. A st atement that no breach of obligations 
has been committed shall be published at the request of the Member of the Bundestag.   
(3) If there are indications of a breach of obligations on the part of a member of the 
Presidium or the chairperson of a parliament ary group, the Member of the Bundestag 
concerned shall not attend meetings in the framework of these proceedings. In place of the 
chairperson of the parliamentary group concerned, his or her deputy shall be heard in 
accordance with subsection (1) above and  informed in accordance with subsection (2). If 
there are indications that the President has failed to meet his or her obligations, his or her 
deputy shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of subsections (1) and (2).  
(4) If activities, income or c orporate shares that are subject to reporting obligations are not 
declared or if the obligations under section 44a(2) to (4) or the first sentence of section 
12(3a) of this Act are breached, after hearing once again the Member who has failed to meet 
his or  her reporting obligations, the Presidium may impose a fine. The level of the fine shall 
depend on the gravity of the case in question and the degree of fault. It may amount to up to 
half of the annual Members’ remuneration. The President shall implement t he decision of the 
Presidium. The President shall validate the fine by means of an administrative act. At the 
request of the Member in question, payment of the fine in instalments may be agreed. The 
third and fourth sentences of section 31 of this Act shal l apply, mutatis mutandis . 
(5) In cases covered by section 12(3a) and section 44a(5) of this Act, the President shall, 
after hearing the Member concerned, set in motion a factual and legal investigation. The 
examination of whether an appropriate service ha s been rendered in return within the Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 26 of 37 meaning of the third sentence of section 44a(2) of this Act shall be based on the levels of 
remuneration which could typically be expected; otherwise the determinant factor shall be 
whether the benefits received and the  service provided are obviously out of proportion. 
Measures under this subsection can only be taken within three years of receipt of the gift or 
pecuniary benefits. The President may ask the Member to provide additional information to 
explain and clarify t he facts of the case and ask the chairperson of the parliamentary group 
to which the Member belongs to state his or her position. If the President believes that an 
inadmissible gift as defined by section 44a(2) to (4) or a case regulated by section 12(3a) is 
indicated, he or she shall inform the Presidium and the chairpersons of the parliamentary 
groups of the result of the investigation. After hearing the Member concerned, the Presidium 
shall ascertain whether an infringement of section 44a(2) to (4) or of  the staff employment 
rules has taken place. The President shall validate the entitlements under section 12(3a) and 
the entitlement under section 44a(5) by means of an administrative act. Notwithstanding 
further sanctions under section 12(3a) and section 4 4a, the statement indicating that a 
Member of the Bundestag has infringed his or her duties under this Act shall be published as 
a printed paper. The statement that an infringement has not taken place may be published at 
the request of the Member of the Bu ndestag. Subsection (3) above shall apply, mutatis 
mutandis . 
(6) At the start of an electoral term, the President shall present to the Bundestag a report 
containing data on the number of initiated investigation procedures as well as their 
culmination in th e abandonment of proceedings, admonishment, identified breaches of 
obligations and validated penalties and the amount paid to the federal budget under section 
44a(5) of this Act.  
Section 52  
Implementing provisions  
The Council of Elders shall enact implemen ting provisions concerning the content and scope 
of the obligations laid down in Parts Ten and Eleven of this Act.  
Section 52a  
Transitional arrangements  
Shares which were already held when this Act entered into force and which were not subject 
to compulso ry declaration under the previous law shall become subject to compulsory 
declaration for the first time under section 45(2)(6) and the third sentence of section 45(3) of 
this Act twelve months after its entry into force.     
PART TWELVE  
Parliamentary group s 
Section 53  
Creation of a parliamentary group  
(1) Members of the Bundestag may form themselves into parliamentary groups.  
(2) Further details are provided by the Rules of Procedure of the German Bundestag.  
Section 54  
Legal status  
(1) The parliamentary gro ups are associations of Members of the German Bundestag with 
legal capacity.  
(2) The parliamentary groups may sue and be sued.  
(3) The parliamentary groups do not form part of the public administration; they do not 
exercise governmental authority.  
Section 55 
Duties  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 27 of 37 (1) The parliamentary groups shall assist in the performance of the duties of the German 
Bundestag.  
(2) The parliamentary groups may work together with parliamentary groups or parties in 
other parliaments and with parliamentary institutions both nationally and internationally.  
(3) The parliamentary groups and their members may inform the public of their activities.  
Section 56  
Organisation  
(1) The parliamentary groups are under an obligation to arrange their organisational 
structure and working met hods in accordance with the principles of parliamentary democracy 
and to align them with the said principles.  
(2) The parliamentary groups shall enact their own Rules of Procedure.  
Section 57  
Duty of confidentiality of employees of the parliamentary groups  
(1) Even after the termination of their employment contracts, employees of the parliamentary 
groups shall be duty -bound to treat as confidential all matters which have become known to 
them during the course of their work. This does not apply to facts whic h are obvious or 
whose significance does not merit confidentiality.   
(2) Even after the termination of their employment contracts, employees of the parliamentary 
groups may not testify or make a statement on such matters without consent, either in or out 
of court. The chairperson of the relevant parliamentary group shall be responsible for 
granting consent.  
(3) The provisions of subsections (1) and (2) above shall apply without prejudice to the 
statutory duty to report crimes and to uphold the basic princi ples of democracy in the event 
of their being endangered.  
Section 58  
Monetary benefits and benefits in kind  
(1) For the purpose of performing their duties, the parliamentary groups shall be entitled to 
monetary benefits and benefits in kind from the federa l budget.  
(2) The monetary benefits shall comprise a basic grant for each parliamentary group, an 
amount for each Member and an additional sum for each group which is not in government 
(Opposition supplement). The amount of these grants and of the Opposit ion supplement 
shall be determined annually by the Bundestag. In consultation with the Council of Elders, 
the President shall draft a report for presentation to the Bundestag by 30 September each 
year, relating to the reasonableness of the grants and of th e Opposition supplement and 
shall at the same time submit adjustment proposals.  
(3) The benefits in kind shall be provided for use, in accordance with the Budget Act 
(Haushaltsgesetz ). 
(4) Benefits provided under subsection (1) above may only be used by th e parliamentary 
groups for duties incumbent upon them by virtue of the Basic Law ( Grundgesetz ), the 
present Act and the Rules of Procedure ( Geschäftsordnung ) of the German Bundestag. The 
use of these benefits for party -political purposes is not permitted.  
(5) Monetary benefits payable under subsection (1) above may be carried forward to the next 
accounting period.  
Section 59  
Budgetary and economic management; bookkeeping  
(1) Details of budgetary and economic management shall be prescribed in implementing 
provisions issued by the Council of Elders after consultation with the Federal Audit Office 
(Bundesrechnungshof ).  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 28 of 37 (2) The parliamentary groups must keep accounts showing the income, expenditure and 
assets they are required to record. These shall be kept in accordance with the principles of 
orderly accounting and with regard for the purpose of this Act.  
(3) Items purchased from the monetary benefits under section 58(1), except items  intended 
for use in the short term and inexpensive items, must be identifie d and listed in a supporting 
document.  
(4) The accounts must be stored for five years.  
Section 60  
Rendering of accounts  
(1) The parliamentary groups shall be publicly accountable for the origin and use of the 
resources accruing to them under section 58(1) of this Act in each calendar year (accounting 
year).  
(2) The account shall be set out as follows:  
1. Income  
(a) Monetary benefits received pursuant to section 58(1) of this Act  
(b) Other income  
2. Expenditure  
(a) Total payments to group members for perform ing special functions within the 
group  
(b) Total personnel expenditure on group staff  
(c) Expenditure on events  
(d) Experts’ fees, court costs and similar expenditure  
(e) Expenditure on collaboration with parliamentary groups and parties in other 
parliamen ts 
(f) Expenditure on public -relations activities  
(g) Expenditure on routine business activities  
(h) Investment expenditure  
(i) Other expenditure.  
(3) The accounts must identify the assets acquired using funds received under section 58(1) 
and the reserves formed from these funds as well as debts and liabilities. The asset and 
liability statement shall be set out as follows:  
1. Assets  
(a) Monetary holdings  
(b) Other assets  
(c) Accruals and deferrals  
2. Liabilities  
(a) Reserves  
(b) Provisions  
(c) Liabilities to financial institutions  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 29 of 37 (d) Other liabilities  
(e) Accruals and deferrals.  
(4) The statement must be examined by an auditor (chartered accountant or chartered 
accountancy firm) appointed in consultation with the Federal Audit Office, to ensure that it 
complies with subsections (2) and (3) above, and it must bear an auditor’s endorsement to 
that effect. The audited statement shall be submitted to the President of the German 
Bundestag no later than six months after the end of the calendar year or month in wh ich the 
monetary benefits referred to in section 58(1) of this Act were last paid. The President of the 
German Bundestag may extend the deadline by up to three months for exceptional reasons. 
The audited statement shall be distributed as a Bundestag printe d paper.  
(5) For as long as a parliamentary group defaults on submission of the statement, the 
monetary benefits and benefits in kind payable under section 58(1) shall be withheld.  
Section 61  
Auditing of accounts  
(1) The Federal Audit Office shall audit the accounts as well as the monetary benefits and 
benefits in kind with which the parliamentary groups have been provided under section 58(1) 
of this Act in order to ensure that they have been used economically and properly in 
accordance with the implement ing provisions issued under section 59(1).  
(2) During the audit, due consideration shall be given to the legal status and duties of the 
parliamentary groups. The political necessity of any measure carried out by the groups shall 
not form part of the audit.  
Section 62  
Termination of legal status and liquidation  
(1) The legal status conferred by section 54 of this Act shall cease to apply  
1. on the loss of parliamentary -group status,  
2. on the dissolution of the parliamentary group,  
3. at the end of the elect oral term.  
(2) In the cases referred to in subsection (1)(1) and (2) above, liquidation shall take place. 
The parliamentary group shall be regarded as continuing in existence until the liquidation has 
come to an end if the purpose of the liquidation so req uires. The liquidation shall be effected 
by the executive committee unless otherwise provided by the rules of procedure of the 
parliamentary group.  
(3) The liquidators must complete all unfinished business transactions, collect debts and 
satisfy creditors . For this purpose, they shall be entitled to enter into new transactions and 
convert assets into cash. They shall comply with the provisions of section 58(4) regarding 
the purposes for which benefits may be used. If, during the liquidation process, the 
liquidators are guilty of negligence, they shall be jointly and severally liable to the creditors 
for the damages arising therefrom.  
(4) Where monetary benefits provided under section 58(1) of this Act remain after completion 
of the liquidation, these must b e repaid into the federal budget. The same shall apply to 
assets purchased with these benefits. The benefits in kind provided in accordance with 
section 58(3) must be returned to the providing units.  
(5) The remaining assets of the parliamentary group must  be left to the beneficiaries. The 
beneficiaries are the persons or authorities specified in the rules of procedure of the 
parliamentary group.  
(6) Measures under subsections (4) and (5) above may not be taken until six months have 
elapsed since the event  giving rise to loss of the legal status conferred by section 54 of the 
present Act. The provision of security for creditors must be effected in accordance with 
section 52 of the Civil Code ( Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch ).  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 30 of 37 (7) In the case referred to in subsect ion (1)(3) above, a liquidation shall not take place if, 
within thirty days from the start of the new electoral term, a parliamentary group is formed 
whose members belong to a party represented by a parliamentary group in the German 
Bundestag during the pr evious electoral term and which declares itself to be the successor 
to the latter group. In this case, the newly constituted parliamentary group shall be the 
successor in title to the old parliamentary group.  
Annex I  
Parts Five and Nine of the Members of t he Bundestag Act as applicable until 22 
December 1995  
PART FIVE  
Benefits for former Members of the Bundestag and their surviving dependants  
Section 18  
Transitional emoluments  
(1) An outgoing Member with at least one year of membership shall receive transit ional 
emoluments. The transitional emoluments, amounting to the Members’ remuneration 
specified in section 11(1) of this Act, shall be paid for one month for each year of 
membership; where the Member has belonged to the Bundestag for longer than half of an  
electoral term, transitional emoluments shall be awarded for a further period of three months; 
where his or her membership lasted for less than half of an electoral term, transitional 
emoluments shall be paid for only two more months,  up to a maximum of three years. 
Periods of earlier membership of the Bundestag for which transitional emoluments have 
already been paid are not reckonable. Membership of the Bundestag lasting more than half a 
year shall be regarded as a full year for the purposes of the calc ulation described in the 
second sentence above.  
(2) Benefits deriving from membership of the European Parliament, the Parliament of a 
constituent state of the Federal Republic of Germany ( Land ) or the tenure of office from 
employment in the public service  or from a supplementary retirement and surviving 
dependants’ pension for public servants shall be reckonable. The same shall apply to 
benefits from the tenure of office or employment in the public service with an 
intergovernmental or international institu tion. Section 29(7) and (9) of this Act shall apply, 
mutatis mutandis .  
(3) On request, the transitional emoluments referred to in subsection (1) above may be paid 
as a single gratuity or monthly at half the prescribed amount for double the prescribed 
period. The third sentence of subsection (1) shall apply, mutatis mutandis .   
(4) If the former Member re -enters the Bundestag, his or her entitlement to monthly 
payments under subsection (1) above shall be suspended. If the former Member has 
received the tran sitional emoluments in the form of a gratuity, he or she shall repay the 
amount that would have accrued after the date of re -entry if he or she had been receiving 
monthly payments. The President shall determine the instalments in which this amount is to 
be repaid.  
(5) If a former Member dies, the benefits referred to in subsection (1) above shall continue to 
be paid to the surviving spouse or to the former Member’s natural and adopted children or 
shall be left to them if no pension rights have accrued under  this Act.  
(6) A former Member who belongs to the European Parliament may only claim his or her 
transitional emoluments after severance from the European Parliament.  
(7) Subsection (1) above shall not apply if the Member loses his or her membership of the 
Bundestag on the basis of section 15(2)(2) of the Federal Electoral Act. The President of the 
Bundestag may suspend payments if there are likely to be proceedings which give rise to the 
consequences described in section 15(2)(2) of the Federal Electoral Ac t. 
Section 19  
Entitlement to receive superannuation benefits  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 31 of 37 After leaving the Bundestag, a Member shall receive superannuation benefits when he or 
she reaches his or her sixty -fifth birthday, provided that he or she belonged to the Bundestag 
for eight yea rs. With each additional year of membership of the Bundestag, up to and 
including the eighteenth year, the right to receive superannuation benefits shall accrue one 
year earlier. The last sentence of section 18(1) of this Act shall apply, mutatis mutandis . A 
period of four years shall be credited for each electoral term lasting more than two years.  
Section 20  
Amount of superannuation benefits  
Superannuation benefits in respect of eight years’ membership shall amount to thirty -five per 
cent of the Members’ r emuneration payable under section 11(1) of this Act. For each 
additional year of membership up to and including the eighteenth year, it shall be increased 
by four per cent. Time spent in office as President and/or one of his or her deputies shall 
form the basis for the calculation of superannuation benefits pursuant to the first two 
sentences above, the supplementary allowance being added to the Members’ remuneration 
specified in section 11(1). The last sentence of section 18(1) shall apply, mutatis mutandi s.  
Section 21  
Reckonability of periods in the Parliament of a Land  
(1) On application, periods of service in the Parliament of a constituent state ( Land ) of the 
Federal Republic of Germany shall be regarded as periods of membership within the 
meaning of s ection 19 of this Act. If the conditions for entitlement under this Act are thereby 
fulfilled, superannuation benefits shall be paid.  
(2) The amount of superannuation benefits shall be one eighth of the minimum amount of 
superannuation benefits specified i n the first sentence of section 20 for  each year of actual 
membership of the Bundestag. The third and fourth sentences of section 20 shall apply, 
mutatis mutandis . 
Section 22  
Damage to health  
(1) If a Member suffered damage to his or her health when servi ng in the Bundestag, except 
through his or her own gross negligence, and if the Member’s ability to work is thereby 
permanently and seriously impaired to the extent that he or she can no longer fulfil his or her 
mandate or, on leaving the Bundestag, return  to the occupation which he or she had before 
election to the Bundestag or engage in any other reasonable occupation, he or she shall, on 
application and irrespective of the conditions set out in section 19 of this Act, receive 
superannuation benefits with  effect from the month in which the application is made; the 
amount of these benefits shall be calculated in accordance with section 20 but shall be no 
less than thirty -five per cent of the remuneration payable under section 11(1). If the damage 
to the Mem ber’s health is the result of an accident, the assessment basis described in 
section 20 shall be increased by twenty per cent up to a maximum of seventy -five per cent.  
(2) If a former Member of the Bundestag who, irrespective of age, fulfils the conditions  under 
section 19 of this Act with regard to length of service suffers damage to health within the 
meaning of subsection (1) above, he or she shall receive superannuation benefits, the 
amount of which shall be determined in accordance with section 20.  
(3) The damage to health must be substantiated by a report from a medical institution 
governed by public law. This report shall be superseded by a notice of award in respect of a 
pension for occupational disability or incapacity for employment or by a notice of invalidity as 
defined in civil -service law.  
Section 23  
Compensatory severance payment  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 32 of 37 (1) A Member who, on leaving the Bundestag, has acquired neither expectancy rights nor 
entitlement to superannuation benefits under sections 19 to 22 of this Act shal l, on 
application, receive a compensatory severance payment for the period of his or her 
membership of the Bundestag. It shall be paid in respect of each month of membership of 
the Bundestag commenced and shall be equal in amount to the maximum contributio n to the 
salaried employees’ pension scheme in each of the months in question plus twenty per cent 
of the said maximum contribution.  
(2) Instead of the severance payment, Members who fulfil the conditions defined in 
subsection (1) above may also apply to b uy in the period of their membership of the 
Bundestag in implementation, mutatis mutandis , of the provisions of the Sixth Book of the 
German Social Code ( Sozialgesetzbuch ) relating to retroactive insurance.  
(3) Subsection (2) above shall apply, mutatis mut andis , to supplementary retirement and 
surviving dependants’ pensions.  
(4) Subsection (2) shall not apply if and in so far as the period of membership of the 
Bundestag has been accounted for or will be accounted for under an insurance scheme 
governed by p ublic law or in a pension awarded on the basis of service regulations.  
(5) Instead of the severance payment referred to in subsection (1) above, the period of 
membership of the Bundestag may, on application, be counted as a period of reckonable 
service wit hin the meaning of the legislation governing the pay and pensions of civil 
servants, judges and members of the armed forces.  
(6) If a Member has made an application under subsections (1) to (3) or subsection (5) 
above, the accumulation of the qualifying pe riods of membership specified in section 19 of 
this Act shall be resumed in the event of his or her re -entering the Bundestag.  
(7) Subsections (2) and (4) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to an outgoing Member of 
the Parliament of a Land  if the legisla tion of the Land  provides for a compensatory 
severance payment within the meaning of subsection (1) above.  
(8) If a Member of a Land  Parliament loses his or her membership but has no entitlement or 
expectancy rights to a lump -sum payment or regular pension  benefits in respect of his or her 
membership of Parliament, subsections (2) and (4) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis .  
Section 24  
Transitional allowance for surviving dependants  
(1) The surviving dependants of a Member of the Bundestag shall receive th e payments 
provided for by this Act but not yet disbursed, on condition that they were due at the time of 
death. The surviving spouse and the offspring shall receive a transitional allowance equal to 
the amount of Members’ remuneration payable under sectio n 11(1) of this Act. The 
transitional allowance shall amount to one and a half times the Members’ remuneration 
payable under section 11(1) in cases where the deceased was a Member for more than 
eight years or more than two electoral terms. The President sh all determine who is to receive 
the payments. If there are no surviving dependants within the meaning of the second 
sentence above, the transitional allowance shall be granted to other persons who bore the 
costs arising from the final illness or the funera l costs, up to the amount of the expenditure 
they incurred.  
(2) The same shall apply in the event of the death of a former Member of the Bundestag who 
fulfils the conditions relating to duration of membership under section 19 of this Act and was 
not yet re ceiving superannuation benefits at the time of death.  
Section 25  
Surviving dependants’ pension  
(1) The surviving spouse of a Member or former Member of the Bundestag shall receive sixty 
per cent of the appropriate superannuation benefits, provided the dec eased was entitled to 
superannuation benefits at the time of death or fulfilled the conditions for the award of 
superannuation benefits.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 33 of 37 (2) The surviving spouse of a Member or former Member of the Bundestag, who, irrespective 
of age, fulfilled the condit ions relating to duration of membership under section 19 of this Act 
shall receive sixty per cent of the superannuation benefits, the amount of which shall be 
determined in accordance with section 20.  
(3) The natural and adopted children of a former Member  who would have received 
superannuation benefits at the time of his or her death, or of a deceased Member or a 
deceased recipient of superannuation benefits, shall each receive an orphan’s pension. If the 
children are orphans, the pension shall amount to t wenty per cent of the superannuation 
benefits referred to in subsections (1) and (2) above; if they still have one parent, the 
children shall receive an orphan’s pension amounting to twelve per cent of the said benefits.  
(4) In the event of the death of a  Member of the Bundestag who has belonged to the 
Bundestag for less than twelve years, the surviving spouse shall receive sixty per cent, each 
orphan twenty per cent and each child with one surviving parent twelve per cent of the 
superannuation benefits pa yable to a Member with eleven years’ reckonable service.  
Section 25a  
Pension -rights adjustment  
(1) The superannuation benefits receivable for the reckonable duration of the Member’s 
cumulative mandates until the point at which a petition for divorce become s pending (total 
period) shall be used to determine the difference in value within the meaning of section 
1587a(2) of the Civil Code for the purpose of pension -rights adjustment. The applicable 
value of the pension shall be that part of the superannuation benefits which corresponds to 
the duration of the cumulative mandates falling within the period of the marriage expressed 
as a percentage of the total period. The pension awarded under this Act shall be regarded as 
flexible.  
(2) If, when the petition for d ivorce becomes pending, no right to receive superannuation 
benefits has accrued, the relevant percentage of the minimum superannuation benefits must 
be taken into account for each year of membership of the Bundestag.  
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) above shal l apply, mutatis mutandis , to the pension payable 
under the acts concerning the legal status of Members of Parliament of the Länder .  
Section 26  
Application of civil -service regulations  
Without prejudice to any contrary provision contained in this Act, the  provisions of  pensions 
legislation relating to federal civil servants shall be applied, mutatis mutandis . Section 53(5) 
of the Civil Service Benefits Act ( Beamtenversorgungsgesetz ), in the version promulgated on 
24 October 1990 (Federal Law Gazette I, p.  2298), as amended by the Act of 20 September 
1994 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 2442) shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to the concept of 
employment in the public service within the meaning of the present section.  
PART NINE  
Transitional provisions  
Section 35  
Transitional provisions in respect of the Eleventh Act Amending the Act on the Legal 
Status of Members of the Bundestag  
(1) The present Act shall apply without prejudice to pension entitlements and expectancy 
rights predating the entry into force of the Elev enth Amendment Act. Section 29(4) of the 
present Act shall apply. The first and second sentences above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , 
to surviving dependants of a recipient of superannuation benefits if the latter dies after the 
entry into force of the Ele venth Amendment Act.  
(2) Pension entitlements and expectancy rights of former Members of the Bundestag who 
fulfil the conditions relating to duration of membership prior to the entry into force of the 
Eleventh Amendment Act and those of their surviving de pendants shall be governed by the Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 34 of 37 law hitherto in force, provided that the insured event occurs prior to 1 January 2002. Section 
29(4) of the present Act shall apply. The first and second sentences above shall apply, 
mutatis mutandis , to Members of the Bun destag who belong to the Bundestag or to the 
Parliament of a Land  prior to the entry into force of the Eleventh Amendment Act as well as 
to their surviving dependants.  
(3) Former Members of the Bundestag who re -enter the Bundestag after the entry into forc e 
of the Eleventh Amendment Act and who fulfil the conditions set out in sections 19 and 21 of 
the present Act prior to the amendment shall receive superannuation benefits under the law 
hitherto in force, subject to the proviso that four per cent of the re muneration referred to in 
section 11(1) shall be awarded for each year of membership after the entry into force of the 
Eleventh Amendment Act until the maximum rate of superannuation benefits is reached. 
Section 29(4) shall apply. The first and second sent ences above shall apply, mutatis 
mutandis , to surviving dependants.  
(4) The pension expectancy arising under subsections (1) to (3) of the law hitherto in force 
shall form the basis of assessment for the pension entitlement if it is higher than the pension  
expectancy arising under this Act.  
 
Section 36  
Transitional provisions for public servants  
(1) A civil servant who has retired on the basis of the Act of 11 May 1951 on the Legal Status 
of Public Servants Elected to the First German Bundestag ( Gesetz über  die Rechtsstellung 
der in den ersten Deutschen Bundestag gewählten Angehörigen des öffentlichen Dienstes  - 
Federal Law Gazette I, p. 297) or on the basis of the Act of 4 August 1953 on the Legal 
Status of Public Servants Elected to the German Bundestag ( Gesetz über die Rechtsstellung 
der in den Deutschen Bundestag gewählten Angehörigen des öffentlichen Dienstes  - Federal 
Law Gazette I, p. 777), as amended by the Act of 21 August 1961 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 
1557) or on the basis of corresponding legisla tion of a Land  and who was elected to the 
eighth Bundestag or to a later Bundestag, shall be regarded as having been re -appointed as 
a civil servant on simultaneous suspension of his or her rights and duties (section 5(1) of the 
present Act) with effect fr om the date of acceptance of election or from the date of entry into 
force of the present Act, whichever is the later, provided that he or she still fulfils the general 
conditions for appointment as a civil servant. In all other respects, the entitlements accruing, 
prior to the entry into force of the present Act, under section 4 and the last sentence of 
section 4a of the Act of 4 August 1953 on the Legal Status of Public Servants elected to the 
German Bundestag shall be preserved.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall apply , mutatis mutandis , to judges, to career members and 
fixed-term volunteer members of the armed forces and to public -service employees.  
(3) In the case of former Members of the Bundestag, entitlements accruing under the Act of 
4 August 1953 on t he Legal Status of Public Servants elected to the German Bundestag 
shall be preserved.  
Section 37  
Pensions for Members who retired prior to 1968  
On application, the President shall award superannuation benefits and a surviving 
dependants’ pension, pursuant  to the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ), dated 3 May 1968 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 334), as 
amended by Article VIII of the Act of 18 February 1977 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 297), to a 
former Member who  retired from the Bundestag prior to 1 January 1968 and to his or her 
surviving dependants with effect from the first day of the month of application.  
Section 38  
Pensions for periods prior to the entry into force of this Act  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 35 of 37 (1) A Member of the Bundestag w ho leaves during the period between 1 January 1968 and 
the date of entry into force of the present Act and his or her surviving dependants shall 
receive a pension under the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 
1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ). 
(2) A Member of the Bundestag who belonged to the Bundestag prior to the date of entry into 
force of this Act and did not leave the Bundestag until after that date shall receive 
superannuation benefits in accordance with this Act; his or her membership p rior to the entry 
into force of this Act shall be reckonable service for the assessment of these benefits.  
(3) Instead of the superannuation benefits awardable under subsection (2) above, the 
individual’s own contributions to superannuation benefits and th e surviving dependants’ 
pension under section 4 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 shall be reimbursed on application without payment of interest. In the latter 
case, periods of membership of the Bundestag prior to the e ntry into force of the present Act 
shall not be taken into consideration in the determination of the superannuation benefits 
payable under this Act. In the cases described in section 23 of this Act, only half of the 
compensatory severance payment shall be awarded.  
(4) Instead of the superannuation benefits awardable under subsection (2) above, a Member 
of the Bundestag who fulfils the conditions of section 5(1) and section 7a(1) of the Act 
governing the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 shall r eceive, on 
application, a retirement pension under the said Act for the period of membership of the 
Bundestag prior to the entry into force of the present Act; for the period after the entry into 
force of the present Act came into force, superannuation ben efits under this Act shall be 
awarded, subject to the proviso that five per cent of the Members’ remuneration under 
section 11(1) is paid for each year of membership. The qualifying periods before and after 
the entry into force of this Act may not exceed s ixteen years. The same shall apply in respect 
of surviving dependants.  
(5) The application referred to in subsections (3) and (4) above must be made to the 
President of the Bundestag within six months from the entry into force of this Act.  
Section 38a  
(1) On application, recipients of pensions awarded under sections 37 and 38(1) of this Act 
shall receive a pension in accordance with Part Five instead of their current pension. The 
same applies to former Members who belonged to the Bundestag for at least six years 
before the entry into force of this Act and their surviving dependants. The last sentence of 
section 18(1) shall apply, mutatis mutandis . 
(2) Section 38(4) shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to former Members who left the Bundestag 
prior to 1 April 1977 and subsequently re -entered. The application must be made to the 
President of the Bundestag within six months from the date of re -entry into the German 
Bundestag. The same shall apply in respect of surviving dependants.  
Section 38b  
Surviving dependants’ pe nsion in the event of the death of a serving Member of the 
Bundestag  
On application, surviving dependants as defined in section 25(4) of the present Act whose 
insured event occurred during the period between 1 April 1977 and the date of entry into 
force of  the Seventh Amendment Act shall receive a pension under section 25(4) of the 
present Act with effect from the first day of the month of application.  
Section 39  
Reckonability of previous pension benefits  
(1) In accordance with section 10 of the Act governi ng the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ), pension benefits payable under that Act shall not be 
reckonable benefits for the purposes of section 29(3) and (4) of the present Act.  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 36 of 37 (2) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to remuneration or a pension arising from 
membership of the Parliament of a Land  (section 29(5) and (6) of the present Act), only the 
non-contributory element of pension benefits payable under the Act governing the 
Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 196 8 shall be reckonable. Periods credited 
under section 21 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 
shall be regarded as contribution periods.  
Section 40  
Reduced compensatory severance payment  
For periods of membership to which the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) applies, half of the compensatory severance payment 
under section 23 of the present Act shall be awarded. In this case, the Member’s own 
insurance contributions under s ection 4 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members 
of the Bundestag 1968 shall be reimbursed on application.  
Section 41  
Continuation of life assurance  
Life-assurance policies in existence on the entry into force of this Act shall be continued, 
subje ct to reduction of superannuation benefits and widow’s or widower’s pension in 
accordance with the number and amount of monthly contributions made by the policyholder 
to the life -assurance fund since 1 January 1968.  
Section 42  
Conversion or cancellation of  life assurance  
(1) A Member or former Member of the Bundestag who has opted for the continuation of 
insurance at the expense of the Federal Republic under section 20 of the Act governing the 
Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) may convert or 
cancel the life -assurance policy.  
(2) In the case of conversion, there is the option of continuation at the individual’s own 
expense or of non -contributory insurance, subject to reduction of superannuation benefits 
and widow’s or widower’s  pension in accordance with the number and amount of monthly 
contributions made by the policyholder to the life -assurance fund from 1 January 1968 until 
the end of the month in which the policy was converted or until the award of superannuation 
benefits.  
(3) In the event of cancellation of the insurance policy, the insured person shall be 
reimbursed with the redemption value based on his or her own contributions.  
Section 43  
Continued payment of transitional emoluments  
A former Member of the Bundestag receiv ing Members’ allowances under the Act governing 
the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) at the time of 
entry into force of the present Act shall retain this entitlement.  
Section 44  
Reckonable service for transitional emolument s 
Periods of Membership of the Bundestag prior to the entry into force of this Act shall count 
towards the period for which transitional emoluments are payable.  
Annex II  
Provisions of Part Five of the Members of the Bundestag Act as applicable until 31 
December 2007  
PART FIVE  
Benefits for former Members of the Bundestag and their surviving dependants  Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice  
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze -im-internet.de  
Page 37 of 37 Section 20  
Amount of superannuation benefits  
Superannuation benefits shall be calculated on the basis of Members’ monthly remuneration 
(section 11(1) of this A ct). The rate of increase shall be three per cent of the Members’ 
remuneration specified in section 11(1) for each year of membership up to and including the 
twenty -third year. Time spent in office as President and/or one of his or her deputies shall 
form the basis for the calculation of superannuation benefits pursuant to the first two 
sentences above, the supplementary allowance being added to the Members’ remuneration 
specified in section 11(1). The fourth sentence of section 18(1) and the fourth sentenc e of 
section 19 shall apply, mutatis mutandis .  
Annex III  
Provisions of Part Five of the Members of the Bundestag Act as applicable until  31 
August 2009  
PART FIVE  
Benefits for former Members of the Bundestag and their surviving dependants  
Section 25a  
Pensi on-rights adjustment  
(1) The superannuation benefits receivable for the reckonable duration of the Member’s 
cumulative mandates until the point at which a petition for divorce becomes pending (total 
period) shall be used to determine the difference in valu e within the meaning of section 
1587a(2) of the Civil Code for the purpose of pension -rights adjustment. The applicable 
value of the pension shall be that part of the superannuation benefits which corresponds to 
the duration of the cumulative mandates fall ing within the period of the marriage expressed 
as a percentage of the total period. The pension awarded under this Act shall be regarded as 
flexible.  
(2) If, when the petition for divorce becomes pending, no right to receive superannuation 
benefits has ac crued, the relevant percentage of the minimum superannuation benefits must 
be taken into account for each year of membership of the Bundestag.  
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to the pension payable 
under the acts concernin g the legal status of Members of Parliament of the Länder . The 
application of subsection (2) shall be subject to the proviso that, in cases where the act 
concerning the legal status of Members of Parliament of a Land  requires a minimum period 
of membership  for entitlement to superannuation benefits and this qualifying period has not 
yet been completed, either the appropriate percentage of the minimum pension or, where the 
act concerning the legal status of Members of Parliament of a Land  so provides, the re levant 
rate of increase under Land  law must be taken into account for each year of membership o f 
the Parliament of the Land .  